Ya no I'd ur going make an app make sure it works
STUPID ADDS THE STUPID ADDS POP UP EVERY 5 SECONDS 4 THAT DUMB GAME OF WAR OTHER THAN THAT... ALL U DO IS CHASE MICE AND WHEN U DONT WANT TO BE ON TIME MODE IT PUTS U ON ANYWAYS 
WTF Needs way more detail. 1. Sun should go down at 830pm not 900am 2. Animals 3. TNT block, diamond blocks and all them rare ones 4 A mother fkin save button 5. People Planet of cubes has all, install it
I love this game. But all of a sudden it when I go play the next episode it will play the stupid ads and then it just sits on the loading page. I have to close and reopen the app every single time now. This is very frustrating. PLEASE FIX THIS ASAP
Mark Now I can't send photo n images pls fix it and no more icon
No online matchmaking Wad a shame, for such brilliant game
Disappointed Won't go past the part to enter your name Fix it or give me my money back
Cards Problem I'll give certainly give 5 stars if cards are made stylish
Suxs I live near new orleans the biggest city in Louisiana. Would think it would be available but it's not. One city available for LA. Don't waste your money. Please refund my dollar ASAP.
Still doesn't find the highest scoring words 99 of the time. Can't use with WWF.
Crash Central Another update and still the additional levels won't load.... No chance of buying the latest episode until they do...
I am disappointed with this app I thought that the app would show you how to do it but it is just YouTube videos that crash my phone. I am going to have to get ride of it.
I had it for a couple weeks then it froze up, I uninstalled it and now it won't reinstall.... Keep getting an error message... But I still get notifications... What's up with that HELP
keeps crashing
Its a nic game Giving one star because no doubt its a lovely game, but you get only Thomas engine free rest all engines you have to purchase which is ver bad n sad. Developers could have come up with free version for all series
It doesn't work. I can't get the stars to move on phone like my friends does on her phone.  Wasted the fee for this app.
Waste of time and money I need refund please
Is this thing is only a picture
Hate It This thing crashes and has terrible music.    Worthless piece of s.
No dualshock support Why can you only use Moga controls on this game Xperia z3 and dual shock go hand in hand except with your game it seems. Fix it
Crashed crashed crashed It crashes at a certain point in the game every time. Waste of money.
You have to pay Lol
HATE No password recovery for my country HATE HATE HATE 2GO NOW
This game is only trying to make money So stupid you have to pay real money for new hero's learn how to make apps rookies
Great Ok
DO NOT GET THIS APP I got this app a couple of weeks ago and it has never worked I contacted the makers and they replied once but that is it. It still does not work Very disappointed Do not get this app
Don,t like new update. Keeps bringing back puzzle previously finished.
Keeps crashing... Icons don't change I want my refund
Thought it would be good I installed this game but there is networking problem plz fix this I pretend don't download this game . fix networking problem I'll give 5 stars
Dose not work Cant get in to the game stuck on the start screen Please fix it and 5 stares for u if its fix
Won't let us enter name.would like money back you thieves. Stupid can't even play
Make it work online properly Loved it but sometimes it disconnects automatically. Try making it work with slow internet and most of the time it says no internet even on wifi or mobile data
Camera permission For real RIP Kyrell Tyler
Bakar Kitna ganda game hai ek star likhana ka liya diya es ko like larna ka liya nahi stupit
Bakwass Ver bakbass game.need to some changes
Couldn't even got inside.. no facebook I downloaded and found out it's only for facebook users. I don't have facebook then how can I use it. Deleted.  At least add google login.
Not what I wanted Ok so I downloaded this app and when I opened it the calibration was off by a lot And i couldn't see the whole screen. Not good for my android. Please make an upgrade for android. Thank u
Too simple Mainly ended up being a HOG. The few puzzle were far too simple and no interaction with characters.
Sucks This game has terrible gracious and sucks
don't have search option plz how I can search place
I think it's pretty messed up when I purchase a app, spend money and data down loading it and it doesn't work  Freezes every time my kiss plays it FIX THE PROBLEM 
   
Please fix this Amanita I am stuck on 11 of 12 Achievements because the breaking out of jail did not register. If I replay, nothing happens. Achievement still inactive.
Ads man Wow how many ads do you gotta shove down my throat  Absolutely terrible.
They just steal your money 1 per minute. How much do the girls get paided They are on their 247  Total scam
Graphics not working properly Nexus 9 Game does not present itself properly. Field is entirely black. Players and uniforms are all blacked out
Used to work just fine.  Once my android phone was updated to 5.0 the app cannot copymove any file...  A fatal flaw since I paid for an app that doesnt do anything no more.
What happened Was the best ever. Now pop up ads on every page I go to. I have to search for the page I'm at all over again coz I can't go back. And one if the pop up ads links to this very page. You officially suck now.
This is point and click call of duty. Three released in one year and a fourth coming soon. ReallyReally Don't waste your cash,this game is complete crap
Had it as well for long time They really need to fix the lollipop issue.  Phones are moving forward not in reverse. I paid, so please fix for lollipop.
Reducing 5 to 2. The course I play Willowcreek is all screwed up. I tried to fix and seemed to help. Now its screwed up again. This is Willow Creek Sun City Arizona. I think somebody is  doing it wrong can it be locked when its fixed
Average at best The 500 music theme is used throughout the entire game, seems like a rushed job, no tension with the dramatic music like the real life game, however graphics look good.   Verdict Not worth paying for im afraid. 410 for me.
STUPID There is no direction to go UNDER STUFF
Pictures in Vault Older pictures can't be moved out. Error states You SD card is full. Back to vault now  But I clearly have space for it. I tried adding new picture into it and taking it out it works, just older photos won't work. Any quick fix
Good game still get ads. I paid for it why am I getting ads.
It thinks we are in Sydney....I'm in dunedin nz.....not very good
Needs to change a bit Not fun at all. Game takes money fast then give you too little to play anything after 3 hrs of waiting.
Still freezes Love the game itself but when i go to beat pops for the second time it freezes on the kill shot. I sent an email to the developers and recived nothing back. If this scam isn't fixed soon I'll have to find a way to get a refund.
Photos in the vault disappeared Updated the app now all the photos saved in photo vault have disappeared..... Kindly help me get back my photos
To many ads I get why this game has ads but this isn't what I thought would happen I can't even go to the level screen without it popping up ads If I take the ads off, it crashes and I have to start all over
Error Error code 24
Will not open ...please refund
It worked for a few months but now it keeps shutting down Now I updated it and can no longer make any phone calls...are you kidding me
Ridiculous I cannot open this app on my Galaxy Note 2. It prompts, 'this device is not authorised to play this game'. I want a refund.
Kent This app charged me twice for one product.  What's up with this
Doesn't work I bought and installed this app on my Huawei G6 but contactless function doesn't work at all.
App is dead, no updates The developers have stopped supporting this app. It's full of bugs that will never be fixed and is a rip off to those of us who paid for the app
Don't like I very very very very very hate this game
Piece of junk Do not buy if you have a note 4. Give me a refund
Shut the ads up OK, I understand the need for ads to pay for the game but there's no way to mute their juvenile music. That makes the game embarassing to play in a public place.
3rd class game. 3rd class game...
Awesome
Worth of money I can still use for anything i want FREE version. I've installed it because i wanted to restore one unsupported file but I didn't know i can use PC app.
Bad Just use a wired USB mic the app makes the game unplayable from the audio delay.
It takes to long to download
Doesnt allow exporting data Expected to save files and export since this is a paid version. What a disappointment Other apps can much more for a similar price. Also takes ages to get connected to the device.
Sucks Crashes like hell and won't let you post if does not feel like it  . Complete garbage
Won't let me play When I click play game it shows me Help Wanted and it loads and puts me in my home screen... REALLY Plus I am not scared of 5 nights at Freddy's l
Crash Everytime after finishing the race, it crashed on my zenfone 2. I want a refund please
No sound Please fix this. HTC One M8
I hate it I can't get past the privet polecey  mabby if you change that I will rate it a five stars I would say I like playing this game but since I never got to play it I rather not if you make that improvement I mite install it agein
Hate it
Worst app ever.no use No point of downloading it.waste of battery.waste of time.DO NOT DOWNLOAD
Still keeps crashing I know you guys updated the app twice within 23 days. I was promised a fix by the 4.12.4 update, but that didn't work. I'm now on the 4.12.5 version, but it still crashes on start up on my Samsung Galaxy S6 Edge.
Unfortunately, it has stopped unexpectedly... I loved this game N0w I can't play it and I updated like they asked and this is what I get
British centred questions I am buying in Ireland but all questions are Brit  centred. Also, when I saw this I wanted to return it and get refund but option was not visible.
Cannot use Insure app after update After last update app doesn't recognize me or allow me to refresh register.
Boring So it's boring basically
What does it do I do not want this social network, but it is practically impossible to eliminate it from Android.
Dumb You can just repeatedly press the same key and it plays the song,I'm gonna uninstall this app  gt
I don't even know though I mean, it COULD have been fun. But the ad at the bottom of the screen kinda covered my shootpunch button, probably something under the ad that could have helped me drive the car too, but I wouldnt install again
Crap Doesn't work... though gps mandatory on... half star
Its lacking Only thing that good about this app is that its Chica, but nothing really works well and its boring
Stole Money THIS GAME WILL STEAL YOUR MONEY. Decided to buy the Unlock Everything packet and it took my money and unlocked NOTHING.
GARBAGE Don't waste your time on this unplayable game. Every time I even open it, the user interface stacks up on itself, So I Cant Even See The Screen. Broken app won't go 3 seconds without glitching up
Canadian Holiday's Bus times do not reflect Canadian holidays. All the arrival and departure times are incorrect.
Worst App This is one of the worst app I have seen in my life. Performance is worst and full of ads at every step
Disappointed Should have read the comments first...put it on Xperia z...cant play even one round  atm dont bother
It's not working Omg it was ma favourite game... After the Last updated it's not working please do something... Otherwise I will go crazy..                                                      Still u can't fix it
This is so not appropriete fir children in the volleyball one the guys privates are dangling out. My little 5 year old cousin was playing this and she asked me what that was. Try explaining that one to a 5 year old without traumatizing them.
Rubish app Used to luv it. Now it won't work on my note 4 . Can't load seating plan.
Very irritaing Ads cover the page and irrevlant
Exelent app This app can make safe driving and protect life
Sweet baby girl summer fun They only give you one
Fails to mention that it finished on the 31st May Real struggle to find this out until after it was purchased and stood in a location with no shaun
Doesn't work on androids Saw the magic on an iPhone. Bought a couple coloring books and tried with my Galaxy Note and nothing happens. Disappointed kids....especially after seeing it work on an iPhone.
Badd Very bad
The business is GREAT The app is horrible to be honest too long to try getting done at first...... moves very SHOW.... eventually I did it.... and the service was great....App still need more work in my pinion
Just constantly crashing Really enjoy the game when it works but just freezes up to often. Takes away from the enjoyment of the game. Using a Samsung Galaxy S5 lollipop update.
not convinced if this app requires android 4.3 an up, then why does it not work on android 4.4.4 devices When you call vitality drive, they say the device is not compatible, how is it not compatible I don't understand
Does not work on latest Android M preview I have been using this app since about 7 years, it seemed the purpose. But ever since i updated to Android M preview is not loading. Please fix it. You will get 5 stars.
page
Developer is begger Every 10 second  advertisement stop begging anyway uninstalling
Lack of features There is better gun apps out there.  There is no safety or manual  reloading.  Solid app but lacks the full steps of loading  a gun
Definitely shows it's roots... This is a port of an old Flash game, and it definitely shows in the graphics. Also, it gets very monotonous very quickly.
Ummmm... This dose not make sense.I mean like it's weird and it's a mimic of minecraft but wierder.Thats all I have to say...OOI wish I can rate it zero star's.
Garbage Don't waste your time downloading. Only part of the menu items even show up and is overall uneasy to use.
Delete Well its just black every time i try opening it and I had some good beats to it but seems like you guys don't bother fixing amything rate 1 this is just bad
Needs fixing My talking bubbles wont work when i click on them they wont work. Slow and needs to be improved.
Fix it Please fix it can't record when Bluetooth is connected. U guys keep messing up a wonderful app
Cheap scam This is a cheap app which tries to trick your child into buying or installing other apps.
I hate it so much I just want to scream
Keeps closing saying unfortunately maps has stopped working Can't do anything, always crashes
Angry parent It was fun but it stopped playing and some activities cannot be unlocked Do not download this crap
OK to start,  nothing more. Game seemed decent,  but after around level 14 or so it decided I can't play without registering an account. Was decent for 30 min, that's it
Bring back old cp I will wreck your offices and show you memories of old cp I loved it so much next day I woke up and it was all changed and again bring it back I will be sending you in to the past Disney Love it never gonna stop playing
rubbish i wasted a dollar on this rubbishware as i didn't check it out within 15 minutes of installing it. now that i see what trash this is, i sure wish that i had done so  i'd sure as heck get my refund lol
Don't install it Very bad game don't install it
             
Data theft Check permissions before downloading. Why does it need to know what calls i make
No What is the the point of paying 2 pound when you can get real mine craft please let me save my work then I'll give you 5 stars
Was fun Seems like after update you win 1 out of 100 spins.... which isn't enough money.... and I refuse to pay real money for fake money.... still nice concept though
Fruit nothing I click on the game, it opens, I chose the game, and nothing. It opens but I can't move a thing. I tried sliding the fruit, clicking it and then clicking where it needs to go and it will not move. Is there a secret to it 
Unbearably laggy Inexcusable performance, lag makes entire game unplayable. Nvidia Shield tablet
Doesn't work Stock lollipop nexus 7 2013. Will not open at all, needs an update.
Adds galore Whatta shame. Looks like a good app. Shame that the pop ups wlways interrupt.
Hate it It was not unlocked next level and it was boring game
App going downhill Every call I make spawns multiple recordings on this app now. Sometimes it record sometimes it doesn't but a 30 minute phone call will have multiple Recordings most with nothing in them sucks now
Hybrid app and looks like it. Webview flickers. The touch isn't natural. Could do much much better.
Inaccurate 80 I know its not easy to predict the weather, but it changes every other min, and seems like yalls guess is as a good as mine.
It was so good before. I uninstalled before. Now that i reinstalled it I can't restore my purchase and there are no keyboard sounds when I tap the screen during songs. The game just turned dull and uninteresting now. Please fix these issues.
WHAT THE FK..... it's a very good and interesting game but.....only 6 free levels and then you have to pay rs 249 to play rest 19 levels.
Won't work Sound but no picture, realised too late for a refund
Love this game, but I recently got a new phone and even though I'm signed in it won't take me to the levels I was at before. Wtf
Suck we u play single player
Can't find city in Florida Uninstalled
Not good Nim buzz some times crashed and it don't work.my mean is most if the time
71715 Update. This game is wonderful. But the recent update has caused some problems. I can't log in. And it keeps saying that I need to try again when my network connection is stable. Please fix this problem as soon as possible.
The graphics stink like turds yeah poop rules
The balls touching each other Hate it
Can't receive calls I can make calls.  I CANNOT receive calls.  Also, the number that is programmed on the app is a Malaysia phone number.  When I make a call, it's a Florida number.  Why, why does it have to be so difficult
Huge file, quick game The file size is way too large for a game so quick and simple. It its fun enough, but playing to 1M if practically pointless and 2M shouldn't be the most. Add 3 to 5 for at least another star.
It crashes all the time
No love it This game sucks
Bug Keeped flickering to a blank gray screen an will no longer mark either  x  or o . Froze
Crashes upon opening Please help Game looks so fun and i purchased it, but every time i try to open it, the game immediately crashes
Critical error License check error every time I paid for this, please fix
There's no controls plus they do what they want do not download or spend money on this 
New Version Is Useless Limited Function Bring back the old one
Love the game BUT..... Love the always will but theirs no obvious way to mute sounds I like to listen to alot of podcast while I play this is impossible as far as I can see currently
Payment failed You should consider linking to Google Wallet
Don't get it It is the worst game that I have played it doesn't even let u play it properly. Like u start then it just gets u through the games level plus it has so much adds so u can't even see half of the letters so do NOT get it.seriously.
Waste of time Its totally a waste of time game I don't know y u make such a games and waste your time too guys pls don't waste your time in this type of games
So many apps Like your all apps but all separate apps use too much space and cpu,please bundle these all cm family apps in one single app only
Doesn't work on my note 4
Love the app but Loved the demo, completely sold me on an incredibly glitchy 1.50. Kinda disappointed.
cant upload it 
Doesn't work Can't transfer data at all
Nothing shows, says no internet connection Usinga a high speed network but app shows everywhere that i dont have net connection or wifi...
Not for children younger than 4
After update my daily challenge don't update , just shows problems to connect to internet. Annoying. Says I got 20 corns for playing, buts adds 0
  .. The worst Shredder version for android..ChessGenius is 100 times BETTER.    2011..   ..     ,     .    .
Ful
Hated it
Fails on the most basic task ... which is to display comics, because the screen keeps turning off while reading. Which makes the app mostly unusable unless you enjoy manually activating the screen every few seconds.
Bugfull Lot of bug exist in the game..also screen size is not aligned. Please update bug free virson...
I love it It it is so cool that I got 5698 as my score is that cool I think it is so get this game because it is so cool   who whoever don't get this game they are lame and if u play this game you arr so cool right in my opinion
Won't download
Where is Everest Bought this for my daughter as she loves Everest, it says it is there but where Happy to change review when that part of the app is there
Accelerometer problems Funish game with great graphics, but the accelerometer will flip mid game for no reason. Entirely frustrating and disappointing. Ruins the experience.
Try Too many adds. Stuck on level, 100 boring
Losing when I'm winning... Make no sense how in tournaments when I'm leading I end up losing and lose ALL of my tokens. I play my cars right, I get rid of All the big cards and still lose Yeah this game is RIGGED
Can't play on my Samsung galaxy pro tab 3 Freezes at 20 and won't load
Very nice Mujhe math bor lagata Han lekin yah APS achha hain
QR code scanner Will not work would not even let me scan the QR codesI tried to scan a  Pokmon QR code but it still would not work
Sonic runs way too fast. I can't explore the upper parts of the level cause sonic is running so fast, I have no time to figure out a way up there. The game is a big blur
Good game but ... I wish you could make it so you can play online with other people for coins  and to have guidelines
Ad packed annoyance 1 long as before apple actually opens.  2 ads per level... Annoying. Uninstalled.
love it when it works The last couple months the server has been playing up a lot and there has been constant disconnections from games.  Extremely frustrating when u can't connect back to the same game. Fix connection crashes.
 My god, this game wont download it says insufficient space on external storage. Does the same for other Gameloft games.
Crash crash crash Crashes more than an icey freeway in a fog Thumbs down
7192015 update still crashed IT STILL won't even open please fix I am on android 5.0 on a galaxy S5 it was so great but now it just keeps crashing
Wish more stuff do on here
No work Tootely west mb
Waste of space 4 freaking mb on my phone taken by this app no one download it itz terrible
Disappointing Monotonous and dry. Strategy often takes back seat to simple luck..
What's with your seating configuration It's not loading. Big inconvenience App sucks
The worst game I hated  they don't  even have good cars plus every single time I play it a car bumps into me . so you better  not install it
Stupid and disappointing Awful awful story. The actual puzzle solving is good but the end is just so disappointing, as I I can't believe that's it with many expletives thrown in.  Should have saved my money. Good app if it was free.
Nope Doesn't work on my tv and the app pops up with ads that you have to click just to get them off the screen. Not worth your time
Spider solitaire Cards are too hard to move
I need a refund I wasted all of my Google play money for an app I can't even install bs
Sucks Lock me out of my phone is due stupid , oh wait  just said  error enabling LOCK OUT now can't get in it also shocks me when I try to unlock it ...OUCH 
THE UPDATE It CAN'T LOAD ANY PICTURES DUE TO THE UPDATE  HOW PLEASE AT LEAST ATEMPT TO FIX YOUR ISSUES IN THE UPDATE, HORRID UPDATE DEVELOPERS, HORRID
Uhh... How 2 open it  It isnt playing........
I will go to 5 stars if you can answer this I had 5 millon 20 coins as saving to get gold ninja, but the next day, TODAY I CHECKED AMD ONLY HAD 2 MILLION WTF
Its okay nothing worth talking about Will see if it gets better, graphics suck, pointer sticks a times
Crashing simulator Okie.... I need help. Its selling my equipped items And crashes  Crashes every time... Please fix I believe in you guys If I can't sell my items makes me not want to play it even if its the best game on market...
Stuck Stuck on level 10 who is that
Ads, ads.... No go
Avinstallerer seg selv Programmet avinstallerer seg selv hele tiden.
Not good The game sucked
It keeps foreclosing after every phase. I didn't pay my money just for it to foreclose every phase. Five,stars,when fixed
Does not work on Nexus 6
Not working I press on the game icon and it doesn't want to work it keeps on going back to my home screen hope I don't lose my pets and house's

Read What is the use of without address or mobile number
Used to be great now dosen't work Was a big fan of br but the app has stopped opening. Everytime it says no internet. And when it does work1out of 10 times the comments wont load. Please fix this br.
Not working when downloaded My sister plays this game not me. I just came from downloading it now and it says singstar mic has stopped.                                    It makes her ANGRY
Falltu Holy waste of time
Sucks
cheap n best
The  time  is  very  less  and  pronunciation  is  bad
Very poor. Not good on Oppo N3 5.5 screen, glitches a lot. Graphics are poor.
Doesn't open Throws a marmalade error for opengllt and hangs on the Sims beginning screen. Wish I could get a refund.
Too unreliable Wasn't too bad to start with, but I've had enough of the tiles jumping around and leaving me having a forfeit when the timer runs out. Uninstalling it
Rip off Credit info is missing and outdated. My report didn't have account payment history for the last 4 months... how does that help Plus my contact details and employment history are 5 years out of date I want my money back
Almost perfect. I can't seem to find an option for left handed players. Bummer.
Not opening It doesn't work at all.all it does is open then closes
Won't load It was fine before the latest update but now won't load at all. I would really hate to delete the app because it was working so perfectly before.
Bad connection Free call to US yes free but most of it go to Voice mail .everyday tried to call but no luck always recording voice mail .The bad signal lost  connection  when in BTW  the call  .Frustrating everytime  call .
the latest update causes the phone to crash when dropping hats fix these issues please
Can't login Useless app, can't login even after resetting my password.
Favorite Love this free cell All others I tried have a clumsy interface. They also make it too hard to win. So glad I found this one.
Sweet girl Why do we need to pay money for the stores
Could be much better Not very much going on, games take too long and gets boring quickly.  Needs more strategy, troop types etc. Tutorial is rubbish.
Very poor indeed Downloaded this app thinking, great However there were three of us skiing the exact same runs and somehow managed completely different results even though we were almost copying each other on the runs. Unreliable and waste of money.
Wtf update D pad is wayyyyy too big why change it, square Enix has no idea what they're customers want
Randomly starts in the background Since the last update, I will hear random audio playing even when my device is in standby.  Came to find out when twitch is open in the background it will randomly start.  Scared me at first.
Nice concept but touchscreen fail on Galaxy note 2014 10.1 I liked the concept but this doesn't work properly the UI prevents me processing past the tutorial first steps due to buggy touchscreen on my galaxy note 10.1 2014 edition. Refunding.
Good app if your area is listed Seen a lot of cities on the list... which is cool, but I have issue with not being able to request areas andor be able to imput the codes yourself. I my own worse enemy by not checking things out before purchasing.
Its getting BORING Fifa 15 on Android has became something i cant even talk about ,whiles our companions in IOS get to play online and all those stuffs, we get an update to change balls in Simulation mode
DOWNLOAD GOLF FRONTIER ITS BETTER Developer BURIED my comment because his app is CRAP DOWNLOAD GOLF FRONTIER IT WORKS FLAWLESSLY FOR FREE This app doesnt have courses updated and gives wrong distance info. Galaxy Note 3
Horibble The free app is much better
App doesn't work Downloaded on Sony Xperia z1 compact. No functions worked at all.
Boring It's just for time pass
Only first mission is completing after that it stuck's in single window Only first mission is completing after that it stuck's in single window
Still doesn't work 4 updates now. Can we at least get a status update We have no idea if it's even being looked at
Meh. Ok spill, horribelt stygt UI.
There are no free hints..  Suggestion  the jackpot should pop up automatically for the hints coz i cannot find it to roll ...
Really slow feed update Devs, could you please answer why updating feed is such a slow process It takes around 1 minute and it's just no good. Running kitkat with ART.
rude this is wrong becuas show ing the pics with the jokes is bad A LOT OF PEOPLE COULD TAKE IT RONG AND FEEL BAD ABOUT THEMSELVES
Nothing New May as well delete them no new updates since it was made
This app is bull The only thing free about this app is the download.  You need to pay just to see who want to meet you.  Just be straight forward and charge in the beginning.  LIES ALL LIES
Bonus and scatters are very rare Uses all you credits at a fast rate with no bonus or scatter.
Hate it worst game ever it crashes if I get 1 wrong
Little rewards. It drags on...
Bad app Downloaded but pop up comes up and won't go off so I can't see the screen to play
I hate this game . You have to pay for the horse cleaning thing , and everything else . Don't get this game , but if you want to pay for it then do it .
Please fix or refund Nexus 6 won't launch
Worked fine up until the update The update messed up my game. I try to run it, but just went to a black screen. Nothing.shame on you rockstar....SHAME
Bummer Thank goodness for the refund button.  I do appreciate that feature
Controls The controls are way too hard
What the heck If I wanted an app that had a black screen when I opened it I would have turned off my phone. And that would have been free.
Don't install Very bad bad game.  Please remove from play store this game
it doesn't work at all don't use this app this is stupid and it never ever worked on my phone so yeah it doesn't work.
Glitchy Not what I expected at all I normally like cartoon network that's why I downloaded it but wasn't good at all
Requires internet signal. Will not work by GPS alone.
Unrealistic cops always right on you and only you. Cars appear right in front of you and they handle horribly. I want all my money back. Ea is not willing to do anything about it. I have been an Ea customer since need for speed II in 1997.
It's not letting  everyone verify root
This game is not all that Its hard who ever is reading this I'm telling you don't play it
Slow glitches Its too slow im definitely in installing
I don't like
Kamal When I try to open 8 months option I found it completely dark.
Jungle marble The game has a problem that needs fixing. Marble not lining up as they should also coming from the wrong end.
Cute, fun game but problematic pay design Even if you have infinite honey, you can only earn a few coins per day and you really need those powerful bears to be awake for Chapter 3.
All black As others have commented all black screen after logo. Unable to play at all. Real shame as all the other apps my daughter loves.
Started of good Can't go into town map anymore it gives me a black screen and stays there I paid money for app fix it now Or refund me Thanks I'll give 5 stars when fixed zte majesty 4.1.3 android
Used to be great I  downloaded this app for my granddaughter. Worked great on my old phone. Now all it does is immediately crash
Okay It was fun at first, and everything was going nicely until in the animal kingdom it would not let me choose the word clam,
Stupid I cant get in the game when I try to play the screen just stays black
Sucks Game is designed to deal out wins and losses. Determined to achieve a percentage of wins or loses. No random deals.
great more historical years but when I would try to play my favorite dynasty it would load and the game would crash so I couldn't play it
No... just..... no
Do not download this...ever It's literally unplayable
Ads and only hindi Annoyed by ads and most of the questions are Hindi.
My and i love this game because my son can learn how to do house list
Season mode Every update the season heads don't change it stays with this beach ball its so annoying.
Won't work
I use to love it Was great but now won't open for me. And keeps crashing
Glichy The game is so glichy when I mine it doesn't mine the block and I'm glitching in the ground
i can't see my favorite forecast sets Guys, thanks for the app. A comment i have is why don't you give the option to see our custom forecast sets I can't imagine why you didn't do it and if you've done then its not obvious to find it
N
Meh... Could of been better for a dub step app I went through all the sets and there are no drops... Not a single one, its pretty disapointing
Keeps Rejecting my Ads I've tried posting various ads but it gets rejected, saying that it's not allowed.
I know for a fact that I have a virus. But this app says that I'm good. B.S It looks to only scan apps
Gotten Boring With no addtional objectives added in such a long time there is nothing left to play for. With 10 million plus coins and over 3000 gems, what's they're left to try for.
I loved it,,installed played all day got to level 52 went to bed got up tapped app and its still loading been loading for 45 minutes guess I'll uninstall and move on and that sucks cool game
An ad Yep their end is ruined by an advertisement built into the plot. Don't waste your time.
Doesnt work, again Won't run compass or speed on my droid turbo
Ads The ads. You dont need ads where your going to have the answer this is redundant. I would have given it a 5 star
Automatically screen rotates... After opening app the screen rotates automatically... Please fix it.
I hate it... U jst need to tap d phone when two circles met. Nothng more than it...
Can't win know matted what. I'm  not crazy enough to buy fake money just so I can lose it.
Too many connection problems... I haven't been able to connect to play online once since buying. Single player works fine and I love how it plays, but the AI is too easy. Please fix your multiplayer
Black screen I can see the letters names etc. But the screen is all black. Please fix this
Play with friends not working My friend tried to join my game and it said I had a game ready so she clicked it and waited for the game to start but it said there was a server error after about a minute... Plz fix and I'll rate 5 stars
Great game Unenjoyable though Really awesome realistic mechanics instead of classic button mashing which I'm better at..probably Great stuff but difficult unless you pay for everything in the game.
Shutdowns Good game, but a long wait to boot was always an issue. And now, after an update today, it just refuses to start. Gave up without playing a ball after half a dozen restarts in 15 minutes. Get it back on its feet Nautilus
Look, you need to fix the glitches and if you do, I will give you five stars
STILL NO FIX.... Drop another starr. Last update for tablet have connection issue. 610 played game got disconected which only 50 rate of getting reconected. Fix please. I am a royal paying customer.
They lied There is no multiplayer Isn't this false advertisement
Abandoned... Was good app at one time, but has been abandoned by the dev. Hasn't been updated in 2 years... Waste of time and money now.
omg i thought it was a great game  i unistalled it   i erased like everything on my phone to download it i couldn't get anything...  i hated it there is of course better thanks
Great but.... Its great but it keeps turning off a shuting down my tablet. I payed 2.99 and I want to play it Please fix or tell me how to fix it
STUPID I agree with Emily Peterson it's completely fake and a waist of time IT'S A RIPOFF
Totally west of time and MB
Frequently crashes I don't know what happened in your recent updates but the game freezes CONSTANTLY now. I never had this problem before. I hope this can be fixed soon because you lose EVERYTHING when it happens.
Don't download this it is because this app dosn't actually like real piano... Some people say that this is good ,but that's not good.
It's to zoomed in I can't play some of the game not really good enough
Best game This game is the best game ever .It is awesome and wonderful
this game is so boring and no more level are unlock only 3 games are unlock please don't play this game... SOOO BOROING
Bugs Nothing appears when I open the app
Rip Off Crashes all the time. Please refund my money.
Worst game for rs 125. I want my money back. Please don't download this game.
Don't waste your money It dosent work I want my money back it restarts my phone every time I open it wish 0 stars was a choice
Terrible I thought this was a game not the stupid and ugly Lottie Dottie video and those easiest puzzles ever or the stupid colouring pages even a 1year old kid won't like thisthis is the worst app everrrrr
 Paid for it and it won't let me install, keeps saying insufficient memory which is not the case. My 3 year old is very disappointed
Sucks It won't let me register.
Just like Vegas..... Just like Vegas except you NEVER lose....its not a game of chance and gets boring  after awhile I have gone from 250.00 to 44000.00 in less then 2 hrs.
Expensive Other apps does the same and more for free.
Wont work on my phone Keeps coming up with s error my son very dissapointed
Room number does not exist I already paid the VIP but when I tried different room numbers given in the websites, it keeps telling me that the room number does not exist. Waste of money
Love it but hate the AI Would have easily gave it 5 stars but for crys sake fix the AI on this app. It's horrible.  It provides the dominoe that is convenient for the opponent during crucial parts of the game. Very annoying
More effort required Good content but terrible presentation. Really no update visually including the widget for past few months to years almost. There are so many visually stunning weather apps out there.  Please at least have a look at yahoo one.
Hate it You can only choose o not x and it shows Android won this game. I quickly uninstalled it.
silly and bakwaas app in hole world FRIEND PLS DONOT DOWNLOAD
Dume It is a dume game because I would get it to load but as soon as it is done loading it closes
They stopped giving bonuses. They still won't add levels with fb no extra cards About done with the game. They ruined it
Not working since last update.
Looks nice but gets dull It's fun for a few levels but after you realize it really is  nothing more than a variation on Go or Checkers, and your choices are just limited to moving in one direction, one space at a time.
Does it only go up to level 8 or something Because it keeps flashing the level 8, but I completed that level and won't let me go any further. Fix.
Fake game Don't play it fake. 4 cards no win Lol
No Good. Keeps lagging, freezing, and etc. Can't continue through game. Is faulty now.
Wont open I bought it went to click it and it just took me back to my menu. no error messages at all. please fix I really want to play. I have a Samsung galaxy s3. seriously please fix
Awesome I only read the application i don't have any experience to play this.. well actually while im installing this games  i commenting.. but in think this games is good can help everyone to stock knowledge  . Well good luck to me 
Sucks No one should play it I played the game should be at least a little more realistic
Keeps taking MONEY out of my account for coins, and I'm not receiving them Multiple complaints NO REFUND
Nothing happens When i press any engine it just appears white screen and saying loading and going exit wout clicking anything. So it means i just waste my disk space. My first time i download
No rider info, or favorites grouping to follow easier. Check cycling news tour tracker  the best, how it should be done.
Wtf I can get the game to go into a video game after I click on a little Care Bears house like 25 thousand times and then after all of that you played the same little game over and over and over needs more in adventure uninstalled
Great while it worked. Worked for thirty minutes then didn't work again.
 disappointed I thought that rhisw game will be better but it takes very boring. But to make it better you should make some mqin Aim to motivate people to play it. If you will than it can be very gooe game. 
Cleopatra Keno I like playing Cleopatra, but this game rarely ever hits,  if you want a better review, let us win once in while I give it 1 star till you make game more enjoyable
Game needs sorting out I downloaded it it worked for a for a couple of days then stopped working either they sort the problem or they give everyone who's had problem with it a refund
Ihate it Does not work
Not good The buy function does not work
Could not change view I downloaded several of the views but only one worked
Don't download Cannot mention location
Does not load. Disappointed. It will not get past the loading screen. Samsung galaxy s3 please fix I realy want to play with this app.
DOC MCSTUFFINS I paid and installed it, i click on the game to put it on for my little one and the game never comes up. After like 3 seconds it goes back to mobile screen
Useless app. I just joined the Mnet app doesn't work chorus .
Chat doesn't work properly, no proper notification s
Not very impressed I'm not sure I like it, is not that fun and lack in option and or functionality
Gems We need something to spend the gems on
Does not work on Note 4 I am VERY UPSET that I have purchased an app that I can't use on my new phone. This needs to be fixed 
Went through, had a house, well I had everything. It  cut out on me. It wouldn't reload. Reinstalled it, didn't even get a house built and it cut off again and won't load.
It's all in hindi, I don't like pls don't download this apps
No automatic night mode
Bad
Connect to Google Drive Failed Getting Connect to Google Drive failed. What's the point of back up if I can't back up to the cloud
Triple sevens Casino
As soon as I installed it, with in a minute it stopped working. Every 10 seconds after it loads it brings up the message that it has unfortunately stopped. So yeah. Stupid
Cant see strategy table as you play only after you deal You could a lot quicker if you could see the table before the deal instead og guessing
Need to change  I got sick because this game a few years never change the sounds or roads there's a lot ideas like jungle or in the city jump over cars need real change a new song  new sounds effects not just colors or characters .. Ty
Still so so Poor bus schedule and location prevents me from giving this app a  rate work on it
Why why why When I go into arcade or free play mode it won't let me have my stranger character im unhappy plz fix or I demand a refund
Not happy, useless The first time I tried to use it, it was corrupt and the app did not appear fully loaded. Very disappointed. It is completely unusable.
Fix this now I ran the game and started a new character. When I tried to craft it wouldn't let me use it. Basicly is wouldn't knowledge me pressing on the left top corner held sideways
If only it worked most of the time If and only if it loads the mangas is it a great app but for the other 90 of the time it's a nightmare to use.. The pages of the mangas just won't load at all.
What a waste This app went from good to bad to ugly don't like it it sucks when after the call you discover that you didn't just loos the call but you also lost your money spent on this piece of dooo daah
Not good Doesnt look like the picture that is shown
Lame
Two of Clubs Why is it dealing me the 2 of clubs more often than the odds would suggest
Unplayable It won't let me ride my dragon,  and every time I try the character just slides along the floor, which the results in the game having to be restarted. I spent so much money on the game, fix it.
Loved it then hate it I had this game but my deice broke. So I got this game on my new tablet and when I was playing,it froze and my buildings,NBA arena, house ,school and church dissapeered . Get my world back and I will rate 5
Can't rate well if I can't play Closes immediately after I downloaded
Eats up points. Gives good payouts you start to win big.but it seems when you compete in the jackpots you start to loseif you turn down the promts to buy creditsbut its still fun to play but its obviously fixed just like in real casinos
Don't pay You pay to upgrade but get nothing after paying
Unable to calculate fare estimates I selected the city Kolkata and tried to calculate the estimate fare but it showed nothing every time as it failed to do the task. Please fix this otherwise this app is of no use .
It is good
Won't update Has issues with updating current metars and tafs. Continually gives old weather.
It's use less app it doesn't work's man.
Bad apps It did not help to remove my apps to SDcard its a waste of money to invest
Lame
Having issues..this is not working on my phone.. Please help
Can't sign up Tried signing up with various emails and it keeps giving me invalid email. Tried many times with my two different emails to no avail. Sorely disappointed in this app. I'll stick to youtube.
No Material design. Lacks polished user interface. Could take a few GUI design notes from the Reddit News app.
Dislike  It was so so so borning no instrest I'm about delete it not worth playing litery the most boring game sorry. 15 
I am connected to FB, and some of my friends show up as neighbors, but when I try to add my fianc who also plays the game it won't add her as a neighbor. I've sent tons of requests, and so has she but still nothing She is connected to FB as well...
Worst game ever Not worth to wait even while downloading
Keeps crashing Every time i join a mock draft it says the app has stopped working. Plz fix it 
 This is not that good. It just does the same as the normal. Im lucky to get likes
The video ADs are very annoying
Won't load I loved this game but recently it closes before it even loads. Please fix
Too bad The game is kind of broken you have to lay for everything  fun thing Throwing water in toms face
Really bad app. Especially the buss tracker. It says there's a bus a mile away on a quiet road and you wait 30 minutes.
Not a bad game but unable to connect to a server makes it very difficult to find a reason to keep it installed on my phone. Will keep it for 24 hrs. if problems aren't fix will uninstall it
Here I go again How in the hell you don't win anything even on free spins. That's bad. Now I remember why I stopped playing this You bet 5000.00 and if you do win it's only 5.00. There is no fun in that Have good games but not fair.
Hidden Object It wasn't that exciting. Got  bored  with it real guick.
asome I hate the dog because they ate my bunny and bird
I used to like it All of a sudden the fking game starts to freeze wen I reach to the opposite side...even wen I be running or tackling... Kmft cho
Paid 2 unlock full version,  where's my game Don't buy games very often but not happy I haven't received what I paid 4
Garbage Really, I feel robbed.
Not syncing correctly Still finding playlist or songs still on device after deselecting on desktop program.
Crashes crashes crashes Its fun when it works. Good luck getting it to work.
Lost all my photos I locked my photos with this app and after few days I opened the app to see them but I didn't find any thing....this is shit I can't find my photos. And I'm wating from you developers to answer me
Dont install This app used 100 mb of my data for no reason. I used it once all the month and it consume 100 mb of my back ground data... this app is transfer all ur contents... fk
Not really free Super restricted, only allows access to one item fruit pop, and even then most ingredients require purchase. Not worth wasting your time on.
I like it Samsung galaxy grand  2
Grrr really hate it I cant open it ,when i open this apps ,its just turn into whole whole white screen then shut ,its never launch  Its eat a lot of space on my phone,please dont make it too large space apps,
Sucks
Notification spam Critical message Buy our premium version. Uninstalled. I can live with the enormous amount of buy premium ads in the app itself, but don't spam my notification bar.
Making fun of abcd2 This game just stinkssss dont waste u r time on this game worst game everrrrrrrr boring...............
What a useless app Background music wont let my son or me hear a thing, if i could give 0 stars or 5 i would
Hate It never opens
No Atlanta How does this app not cover the largest city in the south east
Wtf Rubbish
PROBLEM FIX IT NOW I HATE THIS THING JUST FIX THIS THING RIGHT NOW Bella.. After we put the color of the cone and turned and it says the appgame stopped fix it bianca
Stupid It keeps saying i dont have enough coins when i have enough
Don't work on my Samsung tablet 4 come on Do not work out  my samung tablet 4 I could rated 5 stars share it on my Dropbox please fix it please thx
Ruined the game by lowering the rent so you will never make enough to progress without buying more cash. Ruined a good game. Don't waist your time,  and DON'T PAY FOR PREMIUM
Sad face Dudes sima is all about raising your sims having a family like in real life and having a job. All the other sims 3s have families why can't this one
Jumping I'm doing fine. Then I get that blue swirly thing right before a jump and I can't jump with the blue swirly thing. The game sucks.
Crash Cannot do anything game keeps crashing outlet, guild, angel ect.
Very bad game Tati khage muter piaga
Just don't understand how to work it,gone thru it ova n ova n i just can't grasp it,   sorry
Massive let down I've been playing for a few months and now it keeps saying there's an error and to restart it. It's not letting me race or anything. How can we fix this Will write a 5 star review if fixed.
Don't download The light in the picture is not real when you finally unlock the light it took me a week all it is is a strobe light which you can get in an app instantly
Poor Because u have to buy so many puzzles... not enough unlocked
Hit lucky wheel twice  all 3 reels hit diamonds all 3. Your adds caused phone to crash. Had to restart. Never got any of the credit. So zero stars
Frustrated Absurdly long loading screen times or a fault with the game itself Either way, I never actually got to play the game itself as 8min becomes tedious. Shame, as this was a favourite of mine years ago.
Worst I hide some pics in photo vault ,and when i uninstalled it, all my photos were gone
Buggy I can look past some of the glitches, poor graphical choices, and lag. But it became totally unplayable when the character just decided to stop jumping and ducking altogether. Worthless.
Bakwas h ek dam... Don't download. ...nothing is there for kids
Couldn't even create a user profile so that I can use the app this app sucks I'm going to uninstall
Doesn't work
Don't work I hate it you have to craft your tools in creative change in and I'll rate five and if dont I'll delete the game and get mine craft
Don't download boss Save u r data and time
What piece of shit Yet another piece of shit after Hard Time, if you don't desire to make games just stop and be poor. The AI is bad, i got suspended for a week for getting hit and breaking a chair. Still, piece of crap, just stop making games MDick
Totally useless app.....
This app hangs phone There is no exit option why It hangs phone too but great game I deleted mine and my phone is free once again. i am not taking the risk of downloading this phone crashing game again. Thanks you guys tried
Calling all agents, mission 3 level 3 just comes up a black screen and keeps locking my phone. Please fix and will rate higher. I love these games until now
Stupid In order to get them to do anything productive, or anything for their health and energy I have to constantly watch them. Also they complain about money all of the time and currency is hard to obtain.
Crashes tablet Tried installing multiple times e with the same result.  Freezes up and sometimes crashes Galaxy Tab 3.    to dev I no longer have it installed and don't want to reinstall it.  But showing you care deserves at least another star...
Cool but... Its a cool app, but I can't make this as default in my security settings.. help please.. sorry for bad english
Invalid phone ID After sending few messages. It not sending the messages and error message appearing like INVALID PHONE ID.
Problem I paid 2.69 for this game, but it never work...
Cool It was cool but wasn't what I expected, I should know because, well because it was me
Waste of money Lose one round and you're out, not like the show.
All it does is fast forward your video gt
So slow
Unable to play with real chips Though there is real chips in the account unable to play.. It's going to play for fun.. No option to change.
Not working Purchased the upgrade to have live results and it is not working. Comes with an error and shows nothing.
Needs update Streaming does NOT work, even over WiFi.
Won't even open Loading Loading Loading.. great game... NOT
Wtf Always thinking and thinking... I am unable to play multiplayer game ...other player they just keep on thinking... Kick out them after 15 seconds... Fix it plz...then ill rate it 5
Watch your money. Great game but designed to rob you blind. Not possible to progress to the higher levels without spending money  lots of money.
Objective sucks....
Sooo boring This game is sooooo boring..there's not even a final jeopardy Sucks that I paid for this thinking it would be a good game..don't waste your money
Ugh First it loaded then it said make sure that you have 1gb.so i sais yes.next i couldnt play it cuz it took so long to load.all hiw to train your dragon games i had a prob with.yet again uninstall.
Buggy It won't load my character when I'm walking around, it took my gold coins for a revive then instantly told me I was defeated again. It took me forever to save up those gold coins.
I don't like it I don't like this game because it's building against me from the bottom while I'm trying to keep from adding any flours.
Make runs hard In difficulty hard we can score 30 runs per over. In real cricket its not possible so see that we get do not get runs easily.Autoplay is available for only 5 overs please increase it.
Stopped working after update. Don't go to android 5.0. This app no longer works. I was hoping there would be a fix but it's been quite some time and no luck. I Like the developer but this is a bit disappointing..
Nexus 9 Black field. Please fix
Risky DO NOT DOWNLOAD   The robot if thats what it really is asked for my full name, address, phone number and other personal details, do not download unless if you want to be chatted up by some perv
Probably would be good but it wants you to buy them with no obvious pricing so I deleted them both
It's OK Need more info.. you can log your score but it has no stats. Will give better rating when stats etc. becomes available.
Too difficult Game is too difficult, potions dont give enough hp ,controls too slow to respond,monsters do way too much damage
Login issue I love this game, but it's not letting me access it bc it's not accepting my login. Even though it works on the website  if it gets fixed I'll definitely 5 star but as I did spend money I feel a bit ripped off.
Paid for it but won't download would like the money refunded
It would be fun,but The menu and everything doesn't show up right on nexus 7 would rate better if fixed,even thoughi no it won't get fixed.edit note 4 dont work right either what a bummer sqrew activision mobile bunch of lazy scags.
I hate this game its models after makeup is looking like a monster and it too didn't have the dresses I am going to delete it
App crashes constantly. While busy doing picks the app closes and you have to start over again. This happens sometimes a few times in a row.
Stars look like squares When I'm using the app the stars look like squares but when I zoom in it shows its shape It shouldn't be like that. Please fix and also update the moons of planets that how they really look.
There should be more free levels I would have given 5 stars if there would have more free levels anyway fantastic game
Very bad
Won't start On latest android on nexus 5
Stupid They are copiers they just copied my talking tom and my talking Angela.
Boring No offence but who wants to sit and just tap on the screen for coins untill they run out But if you like to do so, go ahead
Great game, but what's up with the ads I paid for this so that I wouldn't have to see them
It's sucks
Want my money back My son loves the show but number 123 are not visible on the screen so he cant play
drum solo there wore Nno
It won't load properly on my android tablet, I can hear the music but the screen is blank My 3 year old is really disapointed .
Mpoints gone Mpoints have been gone since the last update. I'm not happy I'm missing so many points.
Super app but..... Even though I am using my WiFi network, my mobile balance is getting deducted. How the hell this could happen Apart from this, everything is super
Freezes Up. Don't Buy Wasted my money.  Widget freezes up, won't work. App works great.
Makes my phone less responsive  laggy First install and app looks ok but noticably slows my phone.  I have never had that problem with viber.  Also there is no way to disable the app when you want it offline.
why i love this game but i cant talk to anyone like where you click the speech buble
                      
My 2year likes it Nice app BUT the ads are so not on.is there a way to block these adspls help
Need help....... Not able to deactivate advanced protection as u described in description i want to uninstall applock but not able to do it
Can't even play It crashes and brings me to the home screen when I try to start it, and if I'm lucky enough for it not to it freezes. I can't even play it. I didn't pay 5 dollars to not be able to play this. Please fix.
Rubbish
Too slow This app is very slow when loading content. My child looses interest by the time things load. Uninstalling.
Fire game Redesign the game to take up less space...It keeps updating and is now almost over 1g of data..plz fix for 5 star rating
nope Idk if its my phone but not all keys work
Never download this please The worst app I have come across, the steering has no sensitivity and it never works. I was unable to move the vehicle even with a hour try. Please don't waste your data. I bet you can never drive this vehicle.
Playing for 3mins , and i have to uninstal this piano holyshit , no Ads pls
More Island's Please We need more islands also the app should be more like the website we should have more choices and be able to be online please.
Freecell Don't mind the ads on the page but can't tolerate the flashing... have to uninstall. Sorry.
Money hungry I enjoyed this game until I found out you have to buy additional puzzles. What a ripoff
STUPID It kept taking me off when I was playing do not get and I gave a galxy s5
How to do this On the add for it , it said you can take pictures with the painting that you made. But I don't know how,.
Can't Login Keeps saying no match. Pls fix
Hell with hackers they will be reseting the time machine why the team is not working on that
Crashes with new content. Will change rating once fixed. Refunds for people who paid for a game they cant play
Not that good The sounds are not good, and they do not match what the weapons would sound. And plus, the M14 is not fully automatic unless you physically modded the gun. Sorry
Deleted Profile Updated app and it deleted my profile. Not happy as you have had money from me for this game and I had spent a long time making lots of progress. Now its all lost, what are you going to do about it
Very bad
Wastage of data Not working in my phone
Niv missing verses. Why are you taking verses out of the bible This is stupid and if not fixed I will find another bible app. I have always used this one and have never had a problem but starts taking away scriptures and I have a problem. Fix this.
Mary johnston Could not control shooter
This is the worst that I has game.... Uma verdadeira merda.
Needs Work. Previous versions were better.. The app no longer plays music when I am offline. Plus the most frustrating part is that I have to log in everytime I reboot my phone. Fix these, until then, it's just 2 from me.
Sucks bad Old app made more sence new one does not work
 
Is this Bullshit The game kicked me out of the game
Waste of money Game wont let me click letters to solve puzzles biggest waste of money ever .maybe if they fixed the constant glitches it would be ok . I have a galaxy 5 and the game wont work
Money POT I THOUGHT IT WAS A GOOD GAME SO I BOUGHT IT AND THEN I SAW THAT MORE THAN 30 ROBOTS HAVE TO BE BOUGHT AND YOU ONLY GET 8 robots free and you have to pay to make your own robotMONEY POT
3 hours installation Still waiting, I went to the collections and bought 1 still waiting
It's stupid I can't live for a minute I tried too get a wolf friend but they only attack me. It's the stupidest game ever do not buy
The bad Don't download it because it is your time wasting
Can't win the first tournanment Cannot  capitalize with the house when you're broke because you need to play a tournanent to pass to the next game
Mast h bhaiyo
Some of you where rhigt like only two things theatre dome and I only have two games this took all of my space
I love played often until the update now the game is creepy to me with eyeballs for balls, gloomy dark alley, bloody balls and what not. Time to uninstall. Not my style
Spider Wont open half the time, the other half wont move cards ready to uninstall Going to give it 3 days if not better its,bye bye.
Fuckin shittest game ever do not buy waste of money
Downloaded because my kids love the show and it keeps force closing for a game that cost 6.99 i think it should work please fix this issue  and ill give it 5 stars but the fact that it is unplayable after paying 7 is rediculous
Xperia Z2 The game looks great but you cannot scroll into properties management. Something is not working properly. Refund
Issues with pictures The loading of images on this application causes that it randomly scrolls up or down so that you loose the last post that you were reading. Needs some serious fixing.
Improvement is needed
Doesn't work Google map is much better
no way to contact them You meet a girl here you truely like you have no way of contacting her except here and is far to expensive
Raid Tickets Have been playing for LVL 56 after that no more raid tickets. Cheating money to buy VIP to get more raid tickets. Even you have energy nothing to do. Not fair for regular player without buying VIP.
M.Lockett Not funny
Spam Too much spam a minimum of 20 per day . Mostly porn. I don't get any spam with Gmail. Forgot using Yahoo filters they don't work.
Does not even run Nexus 5, can not get past tutorial. Not happy, waste of money.
Ugh I love this app,but there is one problem.When im in the car i like to listen to it i used to be able to listen to a few but now i cant open it without wifi bc of the new update plz fix this or ill have to delete mine.
Wouldn't work Can't get tape out of music box..ballerina thing at the beginning.. What a waste of money
not to be mean but Its the worst football game i have seen controls are bad teams are fake please try to fix it
Airspace and frequencies out of date Disappointing that SA airspace and frequency changes made some years ago are not up to date.
Season Pass Problem Like a few other reviews here, I have bought a season pass that no longer gets recognized Please help me or fix this, thanks ahead of time.. Stars after fix.
its jist the  a bad and ugly game bad and ugly  game
Frequently crashes It's great when it works. It crashes upon requesting a response from the bot. It's unusable at the moment. I will update this review with 45 stars when they fix the app.
It was great buying the pro version. Now the pro version has pop ups asking if i want to watch a commercial to get bombs. If i buy a game i don't want pop ups. Jesus
DO NOT play this game. It will screw you over on almost every way. Don't waste your money, don't play this game
Stopped Suddenly it stopped working
Wish I could play this... Game continues to crash in my Note 4... Is this yet another game not optimized for the Snapdragon 805  What a waste of resources in this game. Now I can't play it... Please fix this
Respect material design App poorly designed
Not work Fix it
Why Every time I open it it kicks me out
Tablet app Not so good, no help, no exit from settings, better on my phone.
Glitch galore What All of a sudden the animals all turn black, and its so loud I can't think Fix this please
Great app but it has a major problem Although I purchased CarHome Ultra, the program keeps telling me that the Trial period has ended.  I didn't purchase a trial. Until this is fixed, I am uninstalling this thing. Galaxy Tab 2 10.1
Crock Won six mini games to unlock tool to be told each time I chose the wrong chest. I can find better ways to waste my time.
Worst online rummy game ever dont waste your time on this. It doesn't recognise most of the cards clubbed and gives wrong show error. It sucks.. fix it......
Plzzz help me I lost my pics in app lock I need it back fr dat wt shud I do .. while restarting my phone I forgot to unhide d pics like dat only I restarted plz do help me .. I need those pics .. 
Devs do not respond Bought in game money and a week later still have not received. Mailed devs and not even an automated response. Will uninstall and change to 1 star if not resolved immediately.
i m shweta dave daughter and i hate this game i have just  give 1star becz i luv nail salon this game never opens i hate nail salon 2
still crashing I want a refund Can't even play it crashes instantly..... galaxy s5
Facebook..... NOT This games is a lot of fun but it will not connect me to my facebook friends. I wrote to them about it They wrote back and said that it was fixed but it has not been fixed. I even bought the ad free one. Really irritating
PLEASE FIX Tired to load the game, was told to come back in 2 hours due to maintenance and its been over 24 hours. Please fix the issue and i know im not the only one. Very poor
This is the dumbest app i ever purchased..never even worked at all.
Poor problem resolution Have sent several emails to the company to resolve a simple issue, they haven't responded yet.
Keeps forced closing When I type certain sentences, it keeps closing. Hated it
Regular freeze and crash This app regularly freezes and crashes on my phone. This problem only started with the newer releases of the app. I currently have a Samsung Galaxy S5 with Android 5.0
Love the game. But I came one day and my whole team was deleted. So I'm not happy when I was doing pretty good now I have to start all over not happy at all
Too many ads Its a free app. I get that you aren't doing this for your health, but an ad after every game is ridiculous Uninstalling
To much loading
Errors In the middle playing it keeps asking for me to send error reports and then I lose my progress
Don't waste ur time Labeled incorrectly, offkey, and missing many sounds. How can C4 labeled G4 be the same sound as A3 labeled E4
Bakvas hai its fake game
Just get errors
Getting on freaking nerves It does not turn when I want it just keeps jumping  when. When fixed I will Rte 5 stars
What Happen Why my Victor Martinez, Jos Bautista gold, Jacoby Elsbury platinum now have numbers of trash. Amazing update F player's performance
One question I understand that it has access to my camera and all the ads but Why does it have to record my phone call Please explain
Love it but theres a stupid glitch i cant get past When i throw the rock at the buttons that it tells me too hit it dosent do anything so im stuck
A baton is not an instrument dumbass. Even if it was, it would be percussion as a percussion instrument is one that is struck. It can be used to hit a stand to help keep time.
Fun Game, need hirez fix Fun game on a phone, but on the awesome Nexus 10 screen all touches map to the top half of the screen, and resizing the view fixes the map to the bottom right corner. Really disappointing.
Nice. ..
I just want to sing and not go through this process
Zero stars I give this game zero stars. I'm uninstalling it because it freezes up more then it let's me play.
To many ads. Other then that not too bad.
Cant play free fight  There are just 3 options Focus, Strike  Block. Just click on them U will win like a kid  Why didn't u make it for free fight
Cheaters e driver did not turn on AC...picked a long route to bill more...He cheated my parents who were travelling via OLA.. Pathetic service provided...Be wise use UBER instead
Failed expectation Does not work on my Galaxy Note 4 which runs on an Android 5.1. Too bad...
Cannot make picks, cannot view pools. Navigation slightly improved. No feedback button. Why have the app if I still have to frantically run for my computer to make picks. Please fix.
Why fix what's not broken The recent update is a major downgrade,  what gives   No difficulty levels  No leaderboard   Major fail, here.  Very disappointing.
Nothing shows up When I go onto the app, right after its done loading nothing appears
Annoyed I loved this game it now will not open for no reason so iv paid for something I can't play iv tried downloading again an still same issue  Can this please b fixed
Boring It's the same logos again
Lame Total bor and the jet pac thing i used a quick memo and to the creator SCREW U  P.S I HOPE YOU GET HIT BY A CAR
 This game is so fake. It's not even a game. U can't even do anything on it So annoying and frustrating That's why I don't like and get training games One of worst  games I've ever installed on my phone
Developer should have put a little thought into how to design the game instead of how to prank people
Radio Stream works for 10 seconds Radio Stream comes on for 1015 seconds and then stops.  No reason and I can't listen to The Open at work
Uninstalling Stupid adds ruin it
Cannot load the game Stuck on the page where it says choose between George
Stupid This game is STUPID they don't let me go to the part after the decorated cones 
Gran theift auto It does not tell you how to p l ay and it is a rip off
I almost got the division 3 trophy, then all of a sudden I lost my points automatically, and the game took me back to zero level. it sucks
Fake app After installing app I didn't got the credit I have done all terms and conditions but still I didn't got credit 
Gross Would be better without all of the nude fat people.
Greenify has stopped recognizing the donation package I don't know why, but it refused to activate experimental features even thought I tried uninstalling and reinstalling the donation package multiple times
Boring Boring Boring Boring BoringTT
Want the 24 hr forecast in widget The widgets aren't very helpful telling me what the weather is now, I know what it is. I want to know what the weather is going to be for the day.
Nice Was working really good to then all of a sudden it says its not responding
I cannot play when i updated it. Can you please fix the errors. I cant play a game after i download the update. Its just like hang and cannot touch and get in to the games... Please fix this asap.i really love this game.
Mooka All the stuff is not unlocked and it's boring
App not working I downloaded the app and it says download new app. U click on the link to download new app that is provided and it says app not avaialble
Cool I love it it is a baby
Thumbs down It is a bad i am taller  to you to don't download this game
Bhot kharab gems h koi mat urhana
App doesn't send notifications I've had this problem for the three years now across two different devices. I have no other problems with the app but it's useless without this feature.
Won't work with Google Earth since the last update
Cannot work on my Samsung Galaxy Mega 5.8,it can't be opened.
Keira I dont liked it because is very very not fun this not a band the tempo is not like a band the tempo is so messy.i very dont like the game.
Doesnt work Black screen. Can't even play. I want a refund.
Want my money back Tried it expecting it to be fun but I was faced with ads and needing to buy energy. Not worth the money.
I just bought the game and it won't let me refund im so mad 
Its ok No missions. In evry level u r in same place ...no more special guns which makes it boring ....
Should use english Cant understand korean u should make the english version
Wow... It's better than other pool games I've played, but the spin still doesn't work
Great but critical bug I lost a save game after 5 hours of play when play services went down. If a game uses cloud saves it should either have a local backup or be robust to network failures. Other than that a great game,  and well implemented. ..
New update bug When I update to HD version home button is not working 
Not bad
... Okay, there were actually some okay questions in here, but come on If you are making an app about intellectual capabilities, use your brain and fix your spelling and grammar.
Disappointed Can't post pictures or videos as advertised , says I'm off road when not , can't even find the photos or video I'm talking waste of cash bummer please fix
I love This game awesome. So you hate as much as you want, but this like this game.
Too expensive. Not possible to unlock other engines without paying a lot for it. Caused more tears than fun.
Crazy app Not working on samsung galaxy s6 edge
Just doesn't work anymore Never had issues..now I can't send emails to ppl with yahoo accounts says invalid address..so I used outlook app and they went..adding news and browser clearly hasn't worked I think pantsville sums it up..
Entertaining for a while... It is slightly fun but after a while I becomes boring but to be honest it is only slicing fruit
Disgrace I come onto the game it sends me of. Then I get it again and again but I go on and it takes like 5 mins to load I get on it then I get sent of. Fix it and ill give you 
Horrible I rated it 1 star but I wish I cold have rat tree d it 0. Don't even waste your time because it keeps freezing on multiplayer and hard level.I used to think it was fun but its not.  It is the worst game ever.
Say it is not licence Does not work
Annoying Data download getting stuck everytime.I'm fed up.Asus Zenfone 5
The towers upgrade to slow and the airstrikes should be returned if you fail a level you get more heros but can only play 2 at a time what is the point of having more than 2
LG G4  No Notifications Game worked great on my S4, but I cannot get notifications on my LGG4. I can see notifications for FB, Pinterest, Email...no idea what is missing here. Help and I can move rating to 5 stars Thank you
No Lazer comes out In the picture, it shows the Lazer come out off the phone, but it doesn't so I suggest you don't waste your time on a app like this
Delayed letters Letters don't remove immediately when you click them, even though they're appearing in the answer boxes. Also, no 'next' or 'skip' button.
Amazing fantastic
Only 1 star I don't like to play for fun. It should need real cash option.
It wont work Please fix it doesn't load
Bakwas It is totally bakwas
Bought the game and won't let me download it, says error, get it fixed so I can play this game or I have wasted 2.99
Motorola moto G 2 Sometimes it does not work. And display just other than optimization. I have downloaded in the name of uc...
  19      
Dumie Im every one that got android cause it can't read my finger dumb author
Boring Ad after every. Single. Game.  Wheel spins so slowly that this is best played when needing to fall asleep.
Bugg When ever dialogue comes up the store pops up then disappears also the store does not work and won't let me buy anything
Won't open I downloaded the app and it won't open at all. I unistalled it several times and it won't work. 
Crap Why you people developed this crap  I couldn't even able to run it for a single time.  Everytime hangs and not responding would you like to close it. Uninstalled it within 9 minutes. Have to do some Yoga today  to lower the stress.
Don't do it The free version works better than this one.  Developer's won't respond back. Save your money.
A hhhhhhhhhhhhh So boring you shouldn't be downloading it
Waa I downloaded it for my lil sis and it worked in the beginning then all of a sudden it froze and wouldnt click it wasnt my device it was the gameand a lot of animals are locked
Map pack I bought a siberia map pack and got the receipt however when i was gna play it it still says i hv to buy the map pack. So basically wasted my 2 dollars i want refund or make it work
Useless auto full screen video The auto full screen video is quite irritating when you just want to read other news instead of only watching video. JUST FIX THIS ISSUE, THANKS A LOT
It sucks that u can only do like three things on it
Freezes up I get annoyed when the games freezes up while playing or if you respond yo a text you get a white screen.  At that time all I can do is restart my phone.  This is my favorite game to play so I hope they fix soon
Great idea. Hate the ads My son loves this app, but he ends up hitting the ads a lot and it gets frustrating for both of us.
no town or city within even 150 miles of my town, useless for me. If you do not live near a big city, DO NOT BOTHER WITH THIS APP I want my money back ASAP
The very stupid game I have ever played I just hated it its sovstupid making  game In this you just have to increase or decrease the power please never ever download it
It wont work No matter what I do it just wont work. I really want to see it.
Black screen on field I just Downloaded it and when I got on the field the whole screen went black. You can hear the football players and I can see the analog but that's it. Please fix this
     
Crap Doesn't work and doesn't explain in app charges
Does not have united states ..on country list ..doesn't show texas
It doesn't work.  I t will not record my words Minus a star
Crashing It crashes way too much and, it never loads any sneakers it just stays blank
Where are my Dragons Got Modern Masters 2015 added a week before release. Dragons has been out two months and no update
I was telling me king  to go somewhere but it didn't this game is terrible I would not recommend this to anybody
Crashes It crashes a lot
Still CAN'T OPEN Passworded Archive even i put the right password, it just ask again and again. other than that its actually good
After installing, I instantly refunded. Very disappointed. Game goes way too fast to play, and If there's 50 endings, why did I constantly get you've been made into a keychain Just sad.
Game freezes in campaign  multilayer all the time  I lose spirits  reinforcements because of it.
Who cares about top stories Facebook is becoming too messy. Too much information about things I really don't care And I really don't care about top stories Please I'd like to choose what I want to see on my news feed
Closes down Please refund as it freezes and then closes the game down
terrible Terrible, horrible, problems getting to download,  try at your own peril.
Doesn't work Roll the dice and the game cuts out and closes. Fix please and will review my rating.
Fake app Balance not came through mcent...big fraud...frnds dont download
Sucking game No graphics
I hated it. Why can't we have at least 2 rooms Every game you make has in app purchase. No one wants to buy something on an app for 2.75.
It's normal game not so good and not so bad
Stupid Stupid intelligence
Ripoff This game is a ripoff it only gave us one room don't get this game
Fun but... Its hard to move around
Wont load, u see defiant load screen u barely see the sled then it crashes i want my money back
Long wait Wow. Why do you have to wait 3 hours for 1 pass That's crazy. I really think if you didn't have to wait that long, this would be an awesome game. Fix that and I will give you 5 stars.
All  instruments  are  not  open  we  have  to  pay  149rs  don't  load  this  game
I will  delete this app. They are 2 days maintenance writing 2 hours. You are not serious. We have spent a lot of time to play.
Stupid It wont even let me open the app and it tames up to much space and it lags its stupid game I used to love it but now it sucks mabey because im on an Ndroid and not my iphone
Boring and promotes bad behavior
I love playing the game but it's annoying that I can't do anything because it constantly is closing it's self out i would give the game a 5 rating if I could play for once without it closing out on me
Annoying ad Kind of entertaining, but the plotembedded ad for magnetic woo bracelets kind of ruined it for me. Tony Stark would not approve.
Screw you Mina Don't worry about updates or a new version. Mika responded to my email stating they are no longer developing for android because of the mass amount of different hardware in android devices. Really did love the game.
It dose not work All th makeup is disapering. It is so glitchy please fix
Crap Since upgrading it says WC stations don't exist
Awful Should be free. I get more NOAA weather stations on other radio apps. Stations where severe weather is current will NOT work at all
Tutorial bug The tutorial says there is a monster that appears but nothing appears how do I fix this or is this a known bug 
Text too small As above, text boxes seem optimised for tablets or PC's. On my 5 Sony Xperia the text is way too small for me to read.
Are u guys crazy Can't enjoy the game coz of too many add pop up's,,, I gave 4 star before  now it's reduced to 1
Takes forever to load Way too much lag compared to other angry birds. Takes up way more space too.  All around worst angry birds in every way.
doesnt work
Bhangar game It is the worst aap in the world .dont download this app
7 times out of 10 u get rihht to the end of a  run  and what happens A flaming ad pops up. VERY ANJOYING  UNINSTALLING NOW
It will NOT update. Won't allow me to play without updating.  Why can't you.just leave it as it was. I've Uninstaller  tried to reinstall several times only to have the same issue.  Not impressed at all at this point.
Not made for phones Fun game on a tablet BUT this is not made for phones. You can't use the interface because most of the buttons are so small
Wild life count down Paid for app. And it. Stopped working ad soon as downloafed
Extremely cheap The game used to be much more generous with wins  now wins are very few and far between,  and very minimal.   You lose money very quickly.
this game is awesome but after update not open  pls fix this after update not working
Useless Downloads but does not open.
Update Crashed everything Can't even Mock Draft.....Says not opened.
It sucks I keep losing and keeps freezing
First its fun but nows a prob I tried to coutine the game but it doesn't work I tap EVERYTHING nothing works plz fix so I can rate 5 stars
Crap It just navigates to all other sites with updates. Lives off bomb and sky news. Pffft
app problem I have lost 3lac due to app problem.... When I have  selected tournament the table is got getting  connected.... After  few mins my money is deducted......... Please improve the efficiency
Won't let me sign in Keeps telling my Email address is wrong after verifying the acount VIA MY EMAIL ADDRESS
Update. And now my music for my alarm is gone
Will not open Game crashes every time I try to open it. Playing on a new HTC One M8
Stupid I downloaded this for my tablet and you have to pay 7.99 for 100 songs.I get that but at least give me 30 for free 
Lies It's a lying app, there is no laser that shoots out of your phone. It's a great app if you're scared of real lasers and always wanted to try one.
I am unable to switch alarms. Once I chose Reveille it got stuck in a loop. Even after uninstalling and reinstalling no matter which alarm I chose it would play Reveille.
Dissapointed Most calls are of poor quality and than I have to make another call on a mobile network to complete the conversation. Less than 20  of successful calls.
Refund.. Downloaded as looked fun on friends phone.. but game will not boot up or start at all
I did the whole thing in less than 30 minutes Seriously All that for nothing Incredibly boring.
Pop up ads While the content is decent enough, i cannot leave my child alone with this app because the popup ads take her to download screens.
Bad.. Dont waste mp   bad game
Come on It took a long time to load. Then I said to my self I could finally play but no ooh I started loading in the game. It took like 30 minutes  to just go to 37. This game is horrible.
Update messed up this app Cutting off wake up paths doesn't work, auto hibernation disabled on random occasions, frequently crashing... i was in love with this app untill it was updated to this crap.. fix this... ASAP
Purchased trial of this app today to use with Smart Link in my new car, but it  doesn't work at all . Message on phone says that license has expired.  Not keen to buy full app at all
Damn pop ups This is for children and damn pop ups are regular. Ad more features to the app and sell it for a few bucks. some Arab app download pop up B.S
New update making app crash App is crashing wide open since the update. I don't care what's popular or has a ton of likes, I want my news feed in order without all the crap. This app is now juicing my battery at a rediculous rate. Fix or delete.
New levels crash My rating has gone down  the Calling all agents levels crash on 3 and 4 making the game not playable. I am really disappointed this has taken so long to address .... and likely the last of the series I will support.
Lots of Ad's App contains hell lots of ad's even if we selecting some options automatically add will pop up. Agreed that this is free app and ad's should be there but these are lots of ad's i think i have downloaded an ad application
Takes toooo much time to start It takes more than two minutes to start. Not gonna wait that long for it.
problemas no som de voz. depois de 3 dias de uso o som da voz do navegador simplesmente sumiu, mesmo com volume no maximo, a musica para, fazendo com que o navegador fale, mas o som nao sai. Alguem teve este problema
Where to earn those coins.. Where to earn 25000 coins now for next bow. Leave the other upgrades. Also daily bonus is very low. Make this game interesting by improved coin collection.
does not work in slow net.. Always get erorr 700 and after evry move turn off internet you will be win
STUPID GAME can't GET PAST THE FIRST LEVEL YOU CAN'T JUMP HIGH                            
Machetes... What good is a free game that you can't play cause you have to BUY STUFF Uninstalled At least you get a clam a day on family guy geeeez
Hard to play on phone galaxy s4 Very difficult to play for someone with average sized fingers. Nothing seems to click or acknowledge my press. Game uninsulated would like a refund
Nice
Delays Have tried a few thinks think you are better off getting mics
Junk Not good
A waste of time...great idea...pathetic function
Wooooow... Screw you all it dosn't even open this is the dumbest app ever
Nice Good game fun but keeps on saying rate after I rate
Login issue I hope u can fix the av issue since I can't change my old account name anymore thnx
Doesn't work This app immediately closes. I have purchased all the pets and now my daughter can't play it.
Recording blank files Fix ASAP Error at call start ' Cannot record Please check if another application is trying to record at the same time.'  Fix ASAP
WTH......I'm still waiting on a jackpot. I don't play as much as I use to play. All those around me hit the jackpot. I've been blackballed  least it feels that way. This was my favorite game..
Hated it It doesn't work I have tried to but it gust won't work
Since update not running on any of 3 different devices. No support.
Fun game but I bought coins and I've got everything,  I would advise any 1 who gets this app not to buy more than 50 000 coins as you won't have anything to spend them on as there is not many cars and maps
Paid app nags to install other apps Every time you start it
hate  it when I get on the  stupid  game  it shows  a black  screen  and  it won't  load

Refund needed This game keeps forclosing smh....uninstalled since I can't play it fully plz contact me.
Waste of 4 months People attack u  wipe out ur entire army u built for 4 months in seconds. WASTE OF TIME playing  GREEDY Money Hungry developers Tap4bug sucks They don't care they just want ur  Yeah Great Game Guys
Piece of crap Every time I play a game it always exits. What's the point in getting a game if it can't be played. This is the second stickman game from this company that don't work. Fix it and I'll download again.
 Uninstalled I just downloaded and I've enjoyed so far Will let you know more. Well I'm back and it's not good It won't let me log on to facebook Please fix this and I'll change back to 5 
Stupid Game is stupid too many foul balls and very hard to hit waste of money don't buy this game
Fix the bug plz Game hangs after few rounds. This issue started after upgrading nexus 4 to android 5.1. The game is good. Plz fix the iszue
iOS Interface on Android The app is OK, but it's iOS interface is very out of place on my phone.
Can not install on galaxy tab 4 7.0
Keeps hanging Keeps hanging, then isnt responding, n even puts me in the wrong location and I have to keep changing the search location. Why the hell am I in MY when I am in SG. Seriously
Ok .tidak membosankan
Navigation Used to work good, now can't get the voice to work. Used it yesterday and it froze, got lost.
Nt good Touch response is really bad...needs improvement
Won't let me play online It says your google play account has stopt of you fix I will rate five stars
stevenhay39yahoo.co.uk disappointed in having to pay for this app after the 30 day trial period this should come free of charge when purchased with the a new vauxhall corsa paying 14k for a car without the sat navigation installed
I've already paid for the game. Why should I have to pay again for one silly level Would've given it 5 stars if it wasn't for that. It's ridiculous and underhanded.
Bug  slow on samsung The game runs at perfect speed first but then it starts lagging when im turning my face from one light to the other. Plus the app exits on its own after a good 3050 seconds please fix
Iritating After the first the case you have pay for things, or you will have to wait untill 19 hours to finish analysis
Note 4 Doesn't work on note 4 still.
Good on ios not on android Issues with validity of TAFs or says unavailable or loads lots of the incorrect ones  Not working at all on android  Bad to worse
Good. But... Only xylophone is free. The other instrument you have to pay to play.
Why I can't download it It downloads to 99 amd then say couldn't download due to error 902..
Started to download 134 songs. 16 songs downloaded in 5 minutes though I have fast fibre, will take all night till finishes. I want to play when I open the app not look at a progressbar. And there's no cancel. Uninstalling.
constant bufferring after last update app just started constantly bufferring streams that i'm watching can't even watch 5 minutes withhout sudden freeze...
Laggy, freezes up Don't waste your money on this. Very laggy and the pc server freezes constantly. I want a refund.
good
Glaxy Note 4 Aftet my earlier 5 stars rating, and after update, I am getting could not connect, please try again. The same message is repeated even when reinstalling the application.
Loggy I really want to play this game but its to slow to load and if i am going to register it says that invalid email im so dissapointed if you fix this game i will change my rate pls.... Fix this i really love HTTYD    
Move the ads thn the app wll hve more stars
Lag DROID RAZR maxx ice cream sandwich Would be a great game with no lag.  Unfortunately timing is everything in this game so the lag ruins all of the fun.  I hope the issue is fixed, fun game
Painting and drawing for kids Unusable unless paying hopefully.
Can't share to tumblr I use we heart it only for finding pictures for tumblr, and it won't share, it only shows a white screen when i share it.
Keeps freezing up.  Not fun when you have to keep starting over.
Trash  This app jacked up before the last upgrade. Supposedly I lost ALL followers but really it might have been due to some bugs and really all the followers were still there.
Doesn't work on Sony z3 Will not allow you to scroll across to manage your property or select any of the locations. don't bother wasting your time
Tried to play But the game won't go past the home screen and then I tried to uninstall pretty much immediately and it didn't refund my money...bad business
please make more levels
I paid for the game and I can't even open the doc to get tape out of fix please I just wasted money on this games won't do that again deleted
WHAT THE HELL Dosen't this game even WORK
please fix clock does not work
Can't Progress The personal picture you put in will not work whenever I try to buy it and put I in the picture it just takes me back to Google play. Will give 5 star a once this is fixed.
Again the game froze brought me back to the 1st hole and won't let me sign in Facebook and let go to the hole I'm at please fix it
Great game but lost my money Love the game but bought silver and never got it even though they took my money emailed support but haven't heard anything back and it has been over 24 hrs. To bad really enjoyed the game till they just took my money.
Fake Not work
There's some issues with GPS. It's not connecting.
Rockstar help Please fix I start the game everything works like the intro but after the screen just blacks out and that's it please fix its a paid app and I would expect better from such a big company 1 star until fixed.
Ooh no I don't know why I gave 5 star Every time I start  unfortunately pixlemon has stopped 
Not my thing It's really boring and I think you don't deserve one star you deserve 0 stars I hate this game.
Not great It looks cute but it's over priced considering the value there isn't much for them to do butyet takes up a lotof space.
Crushed crushed crushed This game was one of the best in the store,,  now nothing more than a big disappointed,,  specially after the last update.
Too many bugs
I HATE IT I hate it because it would not even load SO SO SO SO SO SO SO SO BAD
The new version I don't like the new version now,  everytime I copy paste a verse there's a ULR that poop out. Dislike it..  I like the older one.
Issues since last update Playstation controller now won't work properly. Three buttons control jump and can't sprint or kick. Have tried reseting controls but no joy. Sony xperia z2
My baby cousin love it very a lot I  mean alot
C'mon what the freak, it keeps crashing and I'm on level 112. SERIOUSLY That said, its very entertaining,the one star is because of the crashing
Rolings sevens all the time. If i bet with 25 chips, then game is normal. If I have a 100 and 25 chip on the table I roll seven 4 of of 5 rolls. Something is wrong, refunding.
Game spoiler Your advertisements spoil the game for me . These advertisements are getting worse, they are averaging evey 10  15 seconds, less of them please. Still can't get to some of the neighbours villges
Please make it better It would be better if you get more stuff for free with out buying it even if it is one of the cakes
When I downloaded a app it did not give me 100 coins
Gin Rummy There is no skill required and the deck is stacked against the player of the game.
Zero stars It keeps kicking me out of the game and when I first downloaded it it was fine now its the second download and one of the updates are probably doing this.
HTC evo 4g Got to rank 15 and now it won't open. For how much I paid this should not be happening. An error pops up and says heap O memory is out...
Unfiar Hated it i wanted a refund under 1 hour and they did not give me it every one rate 1star come on guys
Doesn't focus no flash On a nexus 4. Pictures are blurry and using flash freezes app. Phone works fine with Google camera so hardware isn't to blame. Would really like a refund.
Hate it This game is so lame the control are so messed up and you never get to win the shit
Eh It's sweet to see all the pets feel better at the end ' I'm an animal lover' but other than that this game is soo boring, lame and stupid. Toca boca creators please make this free so people don't have to waste there money
This game rocks 
Used to be good for showbox. This app is now a total nightmare. Video buffers every 5 seconds, and if you are using it with showbox it a total waste of time now..... Anyone know of another app that plays showbox videos and can cast them to your telly
Updating Okay but it needs to automatically update like other stations do not worth buying
Waste of money I drove from West wales to Essex and had nothing show at all. Absolute waste of money. Would Not Recommend at all.
G2 Didn't work on G2 for sprint. LS980
Rubbish Does not work with the Holden Colorado.
All of a sudden no trips are shown. Poor app. Shows different speeds to the tracking device already in my car
Reader I loaded it up and was ready to enjoy some manga and comics and then I realized it had nothing. even searching or trying to download sone but no, i got nothing
Time selection problem It's not user friendly and error prone. Also, even after selecting pick up location properly, it got changed after booking was confirmed.
            
Downloads don't work Get your shite together disney.
Bad game.... The graphics is bad and the controlling is not good
Every time the game updates I lose the ability to tilt to collect the coins on the sides and if I get to a huge gap I die coz I can't jump far enough to keep running
Not good at all Purchased long hair finn then reseted my phone and now its all gone. thanks obama
Lullaby ads Good luck trying to get any sleep with the occasional ad popping in and making noise. Just a moneymaking scam....
... I paused the game and when i was trying to get back to my previous game and it wouldnt let me in untill i rated it.
Really Pop up ads are just irritating. ..only 6 rounds before u make it impossible to go any further...just stupid...almost as bad as actually playing for some stupid tickets....Uninstalled
Game will not play.
The producer has gone back to 2014 by a time machine. He should be creating Real Cricket 2015... Rather than updating Real Cricket 2014 more..
Very bad notesion very bad hopeless aap
Erroneous translation Can't translate a sentence perfectly. Either wrong or incomplete translation. Good for translating a word. But again for it we don't need any app.
Won't Open Crashes on launch on Nexus 9.
Very bad It strucks...every tym while I am playing it strucks....am uninstallin it...plzzzzz dnt download
Waiting for update... again Well, at least the lag is gone. Buildings are not saved. Went to cave, came back out. Everything i constructed was gone.
This game is the GREEDIEST GAME OF ALL TIME Everything costs money. NOTHING free about it. ENDLESS in app PURCHASES. Loved it at first. Would like to keep loving it. Not going to happen. Goodbye.
What happened App doesnt work cant get to the FJR forum please fix or  send back my money
kuch bhi nya nhi hi is app me .. kam se kam 10 bar app download ko  mcent  se  1 bar bhi 1 paisa nhi dya..  kamino nee.. fake promote kr rhe hi isko..
I didn't know I didn't know that after one chapter they continuously push for you to become a member and pay them. I don't have the money for this. That's why I've rated it the way I did. Its annoying. Uninstalling immediately.
The amount of ads is incredible. Every single time you finish a turn an ads pops up... gets on my nerves Shame as it's a nice game.
Game is a joke Whatever numbers you are not on will roll to an extreme. Why would they do that Makes the game stupid and unplayable. Don't waste your money.
Updated.. App doesnt work after update Worked until updated app. After updating app, chose to not record anything since the 6th of 2014..
Make BBM moveable to SD card Please you guys should make bbm moveable to sd card. Its consuming all my space and i will soon have to uninstall it.
It's drawing is not goodnight
Latest version Pathetic  Quality absolutely degraded.  Can't even see immediate  past few days history  etc etc,  sick app now.
Bugs Bugs and Ads So many bugs, game unresponsive at strokeplay, wrong scores of batsmen getting out, wrong names...its full of bugs everywhere ... and so many ads.
Irritating app....... It saying Unable to load question Please help.
Best
Fun but... It kept crashing and shutting down fix this and I will rate 5 stars.
5 dollars a month I can't believe that this service is gonna cost me 5 dollars a month. It is not right. That's almost the same amount I pay for my Netflix suscription. I'm gonna enjoy it for this first month and then UNISTALL IT.
This is actually so bad I can't sign in with my Google account and there's no sign of them supporting the AR feature anymore Very disappointed, invest more in your developers you pigs
You can't play offline I can't play offline and that's why I got it.  I would like a refund ASAP.
Can someone tell me how to play this... I can't move my fruits, may be you should try to develop the game with vegetables next time.......Uninstalling
Cannot find me So what do I need to do to get this working Are you going to reimburse me my vitality points I lost for trying to make your dumb app work
Good
HATED IT I dont like this game because when you dress her up her face looks nothing like you did it so dumb i wouldn't get it 
Will not open since Bristol trails downloaded 
it lags as hell please lower the mem usage of the game it lags as hell after sometine of player why this is not happening in the earlier patches. please fix maam sir
Won't load The app won't load on my Nexus 5 fix it
Rip off After I noticed the insane prices on new content and classes I refunded immediately... I bet, out of those 5k people who payed for the game at least 80 did the same...
Title search If you can not search for show what is the point Allow me to search for my show. It must allow me to select my bouquet as well so that I can see show I can actually watch
FIX IT I can't play ANYONE PLEASE FIX IT. THIS IS RIDICULOUS I can not believe I paid for this..  will someone please contact me..... I have Uninstaller and reinstalled FOUR times
My rating used to be 5 stars... For some reason the articles never show up when I click on them now. They just show the loading icon and nothing ever happens.
Nice Fine it is
Installation was not simple.  gave up rather than waste my time
Poor A poor game all round, needs alot of work doing to it to compete with other  similar games
Had to taste 2 stars to review This is crap  You can't use satellite to view maps   and u can't see history either.  I keep track at all of the person.  This sucks  Waste of time
Terrible So this game only gives me videos and musics Nothing else I thought it was about styling our own barbie dolls not only opening web pages
Awful App is awful, a waste of time, it now won't let me uninstall it's slowed my phone right down. I've took it into Vodafone and not even they can deactivate the app. Absolutely appalling
Its  pure rubbish Who ever programmed this wasn't using half of their brain,what's the point of creating a game if win or progress    Horrible waste of   my time. Uninstalled it within 15 min of playing
Neo x8 fix needed to update Aaaahhh what have u done  Update killed my minix  Blank screen and reboot  fix it fix it fix it fix it fix it  D
Hate it That's not the right way to play.
Wont let me play Been playing this game for ages now all of a sudden wont load the game up. Just keeps closing automatically. After paying for this game i expect  to be able to atleast play it
Force close This used to be my favorite game. I would play it for hours to past the time but now I can't even get it yo work past one run. Sometimes it even force closes as soon as I go into the app. This is horrible
Why can't you take all your chips no matter which place in the app you want to go play. I went to the Texas holdem table and only had access to a lousy 100 chips. WTF IS THE POINT, SERIOUSLY 
aaaaaaaaa so irritating bad game when i was about to win a match it says error and all the time irritating adds
It stinks We never get the ball from the oponents.....and bad graphics to describe the football match and players . You have to fix a lot of things  to upgrade things AND GOOD LUCK WITH THAT .
Poor interface but plays chess well I think it needs a lot of improvements to the interface.
Only works on internal list of forums. Does not work on amy forum, please refund my purchase
Fadooo Bad bad
Nice Nmrl
Won't install I tried to install this on a gs5 and a Toshiba tablet,  and the download failed multiple times on both devices.
Works 20 of the time Always shows an error and won't play movies no matter in what format even mp4, also won't show everything that is downloaded on my HTC one
Missing Features Instead of new design I need features like watching activities of others on my account and play Vine and Instagram Videos.
Spider solitaire Flashing ads really annoying and no options of higher levels of play,
Really lousey Caillou is a 2 year old I couldn't do these puzzles
Does not came I downloaded this game on Tuesday I uesd 230MB in downloading this and,but when I start it loading when it finishes,nothing cames so please fix it for me and I will give you five stars
Not opening.  Tried several times,, always shows error
Like it but won't close I can't close the app. I am having to hit the home button to get out of the app. This wasn't a problem until the last update. Is there a way this can be fixed
Worthless Give a dollar to charity  don't waste it on this  doesn't work.
Connection Problem It will not connect to the internet while there is a connection, leading to the retry connection screen. This needs to be fixed. The game looks interesting, just need to get past that point of problems with this game.
Error 905 Had to do factory reset of the phone, now Fifa 15 won't download due to error 905. Thought it might be due to the Android Web view update, so I Uninstalled that It worked last time I tried but now that doesn't even work.
St Louis Not working
Unable to connect 2 Please fix bugs Chromecast streaming. Unable to connect
Crash Crashes with my galaxy s5
Bra, men sluta be mig reviewa heeeeeeela tiden
It updated but it still crashes before app fully opens
cant play game has a monkey with the hoodie defiant thing and then goes black and  says sorry game has unfortunately stopped plz fix
It's ok but... Too many freaking pop ups
Constantly crashing I still can't play this game all it's good at is crashing.
Weird When u open the app it doesn't look at all what the pictures show it to be
bug hello. I already download the offer.  now I have 9 download slot. but every time I try to download some new manga. it says that the slot is full. but its only 79 downloaded. please fix this bug. I can't enjoy reading manga
No This game didn't work for me
Love the real virtual dj This is a piece of sht
Not accurate. It's not very accurate at all.. It's usually backwards, or it shows the sky at a 90 angle, east where north is, north is west ect. I've had it for a while, and only a few times it has been accurate.
Hated It. Tried using it, nothing. Nothing worked. I tried everything. By the time I realised nothing worked, NO REFUND.
Cant play this anymore everything is full as soon as you go on its stupid this is the worse farm game I have played you cant sell anything noone seems interested top farm best of all of them brilliant farm game.
Good game but.. It is stalling a lot now, slows down too much. Can it be fixed or is it because of my phone Anyone else have that problem
Poor rep service Your google team suks They dnt resolve issues adding debit cards...im deleting this and  google account..
Aweome The app is ok just hope that it's given the accurate result.
Yah I too hated it The videos which they are showing we can also find them on YOUTUBE
very bad i can't download the extra content even though i have 6 GB free, fast wifi and i gave it 7 hours still at 18
Cannot  view  video cuz  of  location Am  in  Mauritius
Sucks Game forces you to pay for gems once you get so far and there is no way to get free gems. You also have no way to delete a building or anything else if you want to get rid of something.
Hichi 
BROKE My daughter loved this app but it No longer works on my daughters Samsung galaxy tab S Very disappointed 
So I bought some packs and waited for them to download and afterwards I had no access to them
Too much childish game... i just wasted my time... huhh...
Great game with bad service I can guarantee you everytime you update,  it will broke something..  The game itself is incredible, so you know what is bad..
Great Game, when it worked I have received a license error and I have tryed all suggested fixes but nothing is working.
Takes too long to load Can't seem to get app to open... takes way too long to load.
Never download this game. This game is really shit
Ads asking if my child is single F this app, deleted instantly Ads asking if my child is single F this app, deleted instantly
No map
Praveen I like that game I like race games
Pete No longer working properly. Was a previous favourite.
Not Reliable after all Very unreliable I had booked a trip and got canceled last minute. Don't rely on this app. They can change your order as they please and wont do anything to help the customer
Will not work Bought this for my son, and there is only audio and no graphics. I have emailed support and as yet no response. Such a shame really
Doesn't work. Tried to use it three times no sucess. Don't waste your .99 cents
3d bowling Its so bad i managed to get it in the middle but it always has one two or three left standing
Does not work Downloaded does not work
Xime L The app is good but first it doesn't connect correctly then when you get in the results take quite of time to be posted
Sucks It lags to much it doesn't even let me punch
Moth Too buggy to deal with.  Keeps crashing... At first it only crashed a few times per day, now it won't run at all.
Good but has some issues I enjoy the game, but the chat gets full and there is no function to clear it  and once it is full no new messages will populate.  If the data is lost you cannot retrieve the player code as the button does nothing
Bonus taken away I purchased the hat upgrade and it stopped working in less than 24 hours. I paid money for it and I would like the upgrade back. I will rerate this app if and when I get what I have paid for.
No choice on refund Installed didnt work went to refund in google store just said uninstall very dispointed plus cant contact company terrible customer service wont use these again
Too difficult Gameplayvis nice, graphics are very nice but the AI is way to hard to beat seems like every other at nat they get a HR I have yet to get a HR can barely get on base
Ads interrupt Too many pop up ads The app is nice. Remove ads for more stars.
Not worth it don't get it U have to buy everything everything is locked
Very disappointing. ..fix it Was all the way done with game waiting for new levels...now I have to start all over again...lost everything
Worst app ever used. Download only if u hav 2.19 mb to waste
Awesome love it so so so much  I did love it but it just shut down on me now i hate it only get two stars  BTW this is my moms account
Totally incorrect load shedding info for drakenstein area.
Events, Events, Events Where is the event Kabam did you give up on us already
Recent crash issues Was a 4 star...  keeps crashing and locking everything up.  When it works it's as  accurate as anything we have tried and good range of view options
Error message Error Marmalade v6.06  Exception occurred in glinit. Cant even go past ea screen..   galaxy s5 user
Micromax A315 Faltu kabhi download mat karna
Laggy and bad graphics None of the animations are fluid. The game looks like its running at like 10fps. Also, the textures are a very low resolution and look pixilated.
Not authorized for use on my tablet Sucks, when I open the game it just says not authorized for use on this android device. Tablet z. Why not A game like this is much more fun on a tablet than on a phone.
Ok Half of them are locked
Love this game but..... I love playing this game but since yesterday the game won't load at all. It keeps saying that I have no internet connection and clearly I have one since I'm able to rate this.
The apple part is hard I thought it was ok but it was not but the rest is ok OH NO
Weak Ps photo is way better
Bad Nothing good
Really Keeps shutting off after every level finished. Just takes me back to my home screen.
Laggy For a game as simple as this, i should not have to deal with 15 crashes everytime I want to play a game
Copied UI of the ICC CWC 2015 App. Material UI is very poor for the Richest Cricket boards official android app..And it seems to b waste most of the times as its not possible to refresh the content neither any interesting UI...
Man what happened.... Use this app all the time for when I do billboard installs. Keeps reverting to auckland... Be alright if I didnt live in Hamilton... Super frustrating
Good but glitchy It's very glitchy graphics wise it the graphics going all wrong and freaking out and jumping out everywhere
Shame  Please update your app to improve performance  graphics. Also when you buy an app you should put away advertising  Last update 1 year ago  How is it possible Do something
brain pop Jr. i tried to download it but it did in,t work don't down load it
Im not happy that it wont open..keeps saying no connection and im not about to start over again because I bought a lot of those stars and I can't change my clothes in keeps force closing
Wont let me open It let me open it for the last two weeks. Now it just says loading assets then proceeds to say unfortunately it has stopped. I have reported it 3 times and no change. I'm uninstalling. Fix it and I will definitely install again.
Down Hill Was such a good game with smooth graphics but since recent updates graphics are patchy some daily missions won't load and targets don't appear in some games as it times out. Please fix these bugs.
Terrible Dont waste your time.
Worst game Always hang up and time out
Login Screen freezes logging in. Won't open, had to uninstall, reinstall...worked once and now will not login again. Disappointed
Hate it When I get to this 1 spot it does that one thing would you like to report this gamethis game is stupid never get it
Love the game but it lacks multilayer One of my favourite games here and in board version. I was happy to see a 3.0 update but then got greatly disappointed by the lack of multilayer. What's with the android version that it can't have a multilayer
Share function missing from the menu Accessed the menu from the recents button but the share option is missing.
Npc cars The other cars are just horrible I stop because a car is in front and a diffrent car just comes crashi g into me Make the cars smarter and ill do 5 stars but for now uninstall.
Very aggravating when u try to log in and it kicks u off everytime. Getting really old ..then they tell me it's my fault Don't think so I love the game ..WHEN it works Otherwise it sucks anymore Fix UR problem tinyco
I don't like it To me,it's not fun.It's like playing Dumb Ways to Die.And to say, I like to play that rather than playing this game.So lousy.......
This app bites Downloaded and then dumped.  For Free,  the letter sounds stop at H Really If I could give it 0 stars I would have. Thanks for nothing.
Vince Finished all 312 puzzle pieces.  Theres no puzzle anywhere.  Fun to play. End result SUCKED.
Doesn't work No games showing when I open the app, waste of money.
Game great but.... The game is fun but it keeps crashing on me and is irritating as heck
I only picked 1 star becuz it only go up to level 8 I will give more stars if u fix it until then 1 star for me
Too expensive Plus they're using fake ratings It's true. You're basically going to have to unlock buy over half the items to use to include kitchen tools, toppings, food, etc. This is just a quick get rich scheme, foh. UNINSTALL
What a stupid I hate this app I never this type of apps ohhhh my foot
Doesn't work Cannot input name to Play
No live streaming
Crashing on ep3 Great game up to the end of episode 2, but game is now crashing at the load screen for episode 3.  Waste of money.  No forums seem to address this issue.  Fix please. Android 4.4.2. Samsung galaxy s4 mini. Ta.
Stupid It doesn't work like it dose on the picture, I should have known it wouldn't cuz of the name all u do is press buttons THAT'S IT it's such a STUPID game
Bugs Lots of bugs when used between PC and Android. And the transfer speeds are so slow. Pen drive transfers in much better speed without any fuss. It takes some attempts to connect with my Windows PC. It's annoying
Bad data counter This last update has the data usage counter giving inaccurate readings.  Went to bed on wifi at 75 woke up next morning at 124 According to my carrier I was only at 1.34gb of usage for the month which is not 124.   Needs to be fixed.
Ads and popups in paid version DO NOT BUY You absolute scum. Ads in a paid version. I will NEVER buy an app from you again.
Sunny Love it how do you hate this game you are haters
Won't let me log in to join, just bought a colorado and is frustrating not being able to try out the sat navigation system because this won't let me sign up
I never got to play the game it kept freezing as soon as I would turn it on it would freeze ill never purchase a game this company makes ever again.
Doesn't work Paid for pro yet all features still locked and tells me i need pro
Soon as I downloaded the game it stopped whats all that about.
Can't place the ladder to continue the game. So I'm currently stuck
doesn't deserve even a single star, I wasted my data
Ads I bought the game so I wouldn't deal with the ads.
Worked fine till update Loved game till update. Now at start of each new game when Ad comes up, I have to close program and reopen or screen stays black
You'd think someone like Activision would know what they're doing. Here's a thought. Let's make that can at least open. I guess the Activision team that makes apps aren't very bright.
Doesn't work Seems like the same issue everyone else is having using an android device 
Regrettably, no matter what configuration I tried I could not get CaroO Pro to operate on my Note 4 with dash cam feature enabled without a VERY significant batter drain.
Buggy The balls do not follow the path that is displayed on the screen.
Ad at top of screen is blinding when looking at sky. Get rid of ads and I will rate 5 stars.
Bigvegas1 I had over 455 diamonds yesterday and today I have 5 I've been working hard to get those diamonds and the game cheated me out of them
Need static IP 
Work well on HTC One X. Disappoint about premium codec not include. And material design not implement.
So what did I get for the money From what I see I only got a few more.... am I missing something. I thought I was getting the whole lot more than just a few
So so Disappointed with typhoon two arms only... very repetitive but nice.. but also very low funding not nice. But not worth wat I paid for the game.
Wow, can't even view the map BC of ads Sucks.  Um, I'm not an idiot. I clicked the x and the ads just keep popping up. Uninstalling
Actually getting worse Hard to believe, but each update makes the UX slightly more unintuitive.
Useless app By using this app we can only compare all Cab fares...bt we cant book Cab by using app..so only for fare comparison why should we use this app
Was brilliant now not so much Its pretty buggy now,  doesn't have that light feeling it once did.
Poor stuff Doesn't worth the money.
Fun but keeps crashing So frustrated that everytime an ad interrupts, the whole app crashes And I've to restart the app over and over again. Pls fix.
Network error Today i installed this game and i open to play this game requires update 166 but it didnt run then it says error with connection issue i check my connection its working how can i get it to patch please help me
Couldn't get in Every time I try to go into the app it sends me to the last page I was on. I even downloaded it 3 time and I still doesn't work.
Bakwas games hai
Same Same to me morgan it does not work
Didn't work 4 me  10,000 Ads Didn't work for my Samsung BluRay player and every single little thing you do  triggers an ad to pop up, and I mean EVERY. I remember some of the ad and those I will never download them ever, because of this program app.
There is zero need for this, this can easily be build into any app.
I can't install This won't download data in my device, I have kitkat with a sdcard 32 gb, I know problems with this but when this would be solved in an app purchased.
Uninstalled Uninstalled due to everyone I try to play something unreliable Internet connection pops up. Everything else working fine on my Internet ty
Not even You call that a game lmao
No images I played the games but there was no pictures for the elements.
Does not work Four times I have contacted you and had no response. Why 
Love Sporcle But the app is terrible. Considering I paid for this app it should actually work, but it never really has on any device. It rarely opens to anything other that a blank screen Not worth the money, waste of time.
To easy It's to easy but I hate dogs because he ate my pet bunny' .I should had not have two bunnies and one dog I hate this day
Hate the updates Please fix the double pinning and please create a paid adfree app. I would prefer to purchase your app if it means getting rid of all of the useless ads. I hate all of them, they are intrusive and offensive.
Great game, but.. No access to purchase downloadable content... Just hour glass. It seems this is a common issue with this game on androids. Once they fix that, I'll rate this 5
This horrible Delayed reactions, ads hijacked my phone.  This app needs serious work.
Nothing is matching Nothing is matching the reality
Baaaaaaaaad Like i couldn t even hear the song.the volume waz up to 100
Boring and not interesting
Fun and Lag I love this game its fun. I have it for my iPod touch and my 360. So I know this game. So pleeeeease fix the bad lag. Fix it so I can have it on my phone.
Good, but... The game is great and all.... But its a shame that you have to pay to actually play with ease...I hope you guys make a free one
Mind of its own The ball could at least go where I touch and not anywhere it wants to. It's amazing how the consistently curves away from where I direct it. Delete and uninstall. Not worth the frustration. Deleted all games from this developer.
Why after purchase Weatherproof HD For Tablet it shows PRO not enabled and ask for 6 months or 3 months pay Why Canadian city shows in Cuba Will request refund.
Additional charges  I have just only bought 1 applicationsally's salon luxury. But why my credit card being charged for 3 itemsMarketplace, RealArcade  Seller Could anyone help to advise
Read  Weep The money paid by gamers does not go into the graphic design.  The graphics remain at a playstation 1 level. The blonde lady must of cost a bundle via. the mole.
Stupid You could just play random notes and it says you are playing correctly. And I can't even get a sound out of it but when I played a different game the sound was perfect. It shouldn't get any stars.
Crashing I like the game but after a few race it crashes. And then I need to restart my phone which is a note 4. Plz fix and I'll give better review
Not worth your money This is something your child would easily get bored with
Diane. Can not get this game to work on my  Samsung galaxy tab 4. It's hopeless Ltd just want work I've deleted it and downloaded it again and it want work gave up now.
Doesn't work on Nexus 5. Can see intro and that's where it ends.
It will not open on my Acer iconia A1830 Every time I try to start this game I go to a black screen and that's it Would be great if this worked since I kick started it and have waited a while for it to get on the android. Pls fix this problem
Stupid game How ever made this  are stupid because it dont even work
It won't let me do anything
Abandoned So it is abandoned. Developer responding to the random comments, to keep ppl thinking that they still working on it. Just the potential money from new buyers. No comments on subjects to be commented.
I have given this game months and reinstalled hoping it would be fixed and nothing.
No, so good Sometimes when I play versus IA that no play anymore and I have than restart the game, sorry by the bad English
NOt so GooD It nEed a lot of improvements.  The App is hanging often.  And you should provide atlest chatting option free.
Terrible Would not even open just kept forcing app to close   Shocking Very upset 2 year old.
Kya game hai yar bakwaas
Dumb It's just plain stupid. Like after you're done cleaning her and her hair it goes back to the home screen.
Cannot log in I'm an active lvl 40 player but since 1.60 update I cannot log in with my phone  unfortunely summoners war had stopped. My phone is samsung note 2.So I changed my review to 1 star. Please fix ASAP...
spam spam accounts start games and then never respond, now I have to wait for a new game. boo.
Does not even run Blank screen.
Downloading problem. Asking to download extra content, but after 90 or before that the download stops and restarts. Not working at all. It's not working in asus zenfone 4.. please fix that..
Too easy Crap game, far too easy, no fun at all.
Too hard Need to hit a boundary every ball to stand any sort of chance. Design to make you pay to win. Will be deleting
I can log in but... When I want to unfollow users who did not follow me back, I have to wait for about 60 seconds than I can unfollow them all. Why it's so late to unfollow one user So weird Lol
Ads I understand why there are Ads but do they really have to constantly flash while you're tryin to concentrate on a card game
Doesn't Load I'm on Hudl 2 and doesn't load stuck at load screen I gave it 30mins but nothing  waste of fuing money
Won't even open......... It seemed fun so I downloaded it. It won't even fricking open Stupid.
How much is the advanced version How much is the advanced version I have tried the support website, calling support, searched via google but I cannot find how much it costs. I am loathe to click Upgrade Now in case I get charged.
No. Just no Why do I need to pay for a 4 chapter manga I want to read persona Q and I cannot... Only a manga with a little amount of chapters
Cant Can't play adventure mode
BOOOH Cannot be open.contacted google for refund but still charge to the app that is useless. Money , time wasted and device space eater. Uninstall
Dislike it It won't let me move at all when you begin the game.... 2 stars.... not the best app at all
Hate it.
Controls do have problem
Not free After 3 levels the game demands  its entertainment value is ok.
Save ur time for not installing this Full of bugs. Damn wasted my time
Not Worth It You have to download a second app for weather which without you cant use this app by itself. In this day and age when space is precious because of growing apps, needinganything other than what you already downloaded is ridiculous.
Bad game Not even a game,very very easy. Can even make a move.
My pictures thing dosent work I cant progress in the game without it 5 stars iif you fix.
Gets disconnected I couldn't even finish a single game. Every time something happens and gets disconnected. I hoped for a nice game but I couldn't find one. If there was an option for zero stars, I would have given you that.
Really I played money for this and it doesn't even work. Its only showing me on the screen but won't play
Money hungry Everything is money...fix that and maybe u get 5stars
Awful Why stupid ads I wear glasses and had problems with the app getting smaller as levels progress. Make it bigger please and no ads then I may re install it
This game has a lot of bugs to fix The music is not in sync with the character which is the whole point, everytime you pause the game the music starts over and I die automatically Developers, you have some work to do.
No good I as an adult had a hard time understanding how to play the game.  Once I figured it out the game shut down halfway through each snowcone build. I don't think my 4 year old was going to enjoy it.
Not for kids of  2. Every game seems very poorly designed for kids.
Won't allow me to open it on FB Can't open it on FB, denies my email password. Paid 2.99 for an app I can't play. Any suggestions
Some issue updating game data There is no problem with my Internet connection but the game won't work. Don't bother with this
Was good... Won't connect to Facebook, progress lost and can't play with friends which ruins the game completely
Outdated. I usually hear about upcoming Jordans from other sites way before they're even mentioned on this app... I honestly only check the app once every 3 or 4 months but it doesn't update often enough for even that sometimes. Use to be better.
Doesn't work Bought it a long time ago and just downloaded it again and doesn't work on my Note 4, I'm pretty sure it didn't work when I first bought it either, please fix
Buttons Does not work properly. Should have been fun game but it makes you angry and no more fun
It says coupon is invalid after booking. Very bad an app. Would never use it again
This games steering sucks no one install this game
Almera Good
Pathetic game ever Everything is bad
A very nice game but what is the meaning of maintenance will be online by two hours since10 pls fix it before I will remove the game because I have another game like it but I prefer it
Very very bad Booked the cab and the driver blatantly refused to come. After this fiasco, I got a call from meru saying that I had refused the cab. Very pathetic service...
I like it but Every time I win a battle against another player to unlock more levels yet it don't unlock them fix and it will be 5 stars
Doesn't work My three year old loves peppa pig but this app doesn't work. She gets upset and she's unhappy doesn't deserve a star. This should be taken down or fixed.
I want a refund Every game either freezes or closes on my gs3. Really disappointed this game isn't even worth .99 cents. How do I get my money back
Still cant play. Solution please I really hate it. I cant play my fav rpg. Please if you are repairing the updates please inform us so we know whats the problen why we cant play it. Thank you.
Too many ads. Not same as coc free download and no ads.
Chapter 12 Is bankrupt of any thought check out act 1 can any one get pass like to hear  from any one who has.
Game balks  refuses to work, but the ads certainly keep on just fine Uninstalled
Wont start up Have a hard time getting the game to start up.  Have to go to app management and force stop and then go back and start it for it to work.  Plz fix for 5 stars
They're Just 4 lulubys and number 1and4 and number2and 3 are the same.  
Freezes after every level
Not  much good Some level of this game is bore
Latest update screwed the pooch It was working fine until the latest update. Now it won't even load. Already tried uninstalling then reinstalling to no effect. Android 4.4.2. LG LS660.
 It does not have come little children. So im mad. It also has a twilight song which is not my little pony and it is song 6. Listen really closely to it.
Developed a major bug When skipping to my next shift, the play is immediately stopped with a whistle... and the stats get screwed up faceoffs are recorded as being won by both players, shift counts are wrong or unrealistic etc
Pictures aren't loading Ever since the new update my pics aren't loading I keep getting that yikes notification please fix this I used to love this app
Uninstall Every time i installed this application it come up again after restart phone in setting cant find unstall button in phone setting uninstall button is no more usable help i want to uninstall this app permanently
Samsung galaxy tab 2 I'm on my 15th generation I have over 3.5 million. Yet I've never found any bugs and only 23 the twigs. Really needs some updates for something else u can do. Why not be able to buy a new house
Horrible Lag I have an LG G4. Top of the line specs and still the lag interferes with gameplay. Dissapointed. Should have tried demo first.
This game is incredibly stupid. Most of it doesn't even make sense, and starting from the beginning is annoying. The artwork is sloppy and the sound effects ts are childish and stupid.
Boring Paid for it, too 
Terrible. Sounds are just awful.
I don't really like this game because I can't get everything and I can't buy it Horrid can't get stuff
Whyyy Why can i no longer swap characters, i have a hunter and i started the new character but i cant get back on my hunter.. very upset because its level 55 and ive put money into this game..
Very bad               
Problems with mor problems I love the game, but the technical issues are getting on my nerves. Also the time clock for your ranking is short, it just a tactic to spend your coins.
Booo You have to win the things by games and there's multiple boxes if you choose the wrong one you have to redo the games like the 1 millionth time I've done this please fix this
Too much RUBISH It contains a lot of virus     after installing my I pad got hanged    and didn't start again
Bangar game It cant be played
Cannot hear any voice. Nimbuzz is not even able to connect to the echo test. There is no problem with my internet connectivity. I bought Nimbuzz credit but its useless now.
Style book Whenever I am going in the style book its just loading and the screen is going blank please put a feature that in the game only we can do the style book
Not working Unfortunately it wasn't possible to open any of the videos. App couldn't recognize and connect via neither wifi nor mobil internet.
Bad app ... Terlalu bayak iklan najis
Rip off Buy the he to find out you only get 1 lousy table and have to pay 2 for other one what a rip off
Multi device Great game but cant us my stats on my other device which is bad . and iv played for awhile and now stopped because of this issue
Not working on Samsung Galaxy SIII I can't try it, so for now, just two stars.
Cost me my monthly 2 gigs of data to upload a few short videos. Not  pleased at all.... Ugh. Battery sucker. Galaxy note 3 2 batteries a day.
Cannot open app on my device
Was so great before the last update Great simple design, but these new unskippable 30 second animated ads are deplorable. I'm okay with ads for such a great free app, but the video ads are a step too far.
New graphics .. Is just bad. Used to love the game, but now it is barely payable because of the new graphics.
It does not let you jump when you try it on your own
My phone A888 duo, apps crashing.. It wont let me play It keeps crashing after loading Please fix 
Not all features on app work.
I don't know how to play it I can't play plz show me a video clip
Hook won't set Tried 100 times and hook will not set. Refund please.
Nonsense Don't waste your money by buying this game...really a stupid game...no radar,no back camera angle.got bored in just 2 minutes..much better game than this is extreme landings..
Updated to the latest version and now when I try to load my trips... The app just closes.
Lame
Crash crash crash. Oneplus one. Game occasionally force closes and, after reopening, restarts, deleting all unsaved progress. Amazing game, not worth the money if I have to do everything twice. I'll just emulate it for free....
Lost all my data for no reason Give my data backI lost 5thousand coins and lots of weapons....GIVE IT BACK
Not all games working On my gen 1 nexus 7 and lollipop not all the games work. Some just start the leave an empty screen.
Worst Continuously ads are popping up. It's very irritating. I recommend not to install this apps. Every 3 sec ad pop up.
Useless Keeps Crashing , doesn't even load on Mi tab
No fun anymore Been waiting and waiting and waiting for more sticker pages yet every update you do doesnt include those. I now have 14 sticker packs waiting unopened for more sticker pages. Please give more sticker pages soon.
From 5 stars to 1 And 0 if i could...my problem was that boomsound on my m8 goes on and off every sec and it was so annoying and this app is the reason
Not installing No matter how much I try, it won't install on ms HTC DESIRE. Always starts to download, but it gets stuck at 140 mb, and won't install. I have 1GB of free space on my SD card...
Clothes are ugly The clothes are so ugly, all of my sims look like hobos. Why do you keep taking the good outfits away Im Really disappointed by this. It should be just like the computer version.
Ads Pay 2 to watch ads Sign me up
Update keeps crashing Love this game but new update is very buggy. Very slow, it's painful and it crashes every time I add friends or try to help them. It's just too clumsy to play now so I've just stopped until there is some kind of fix.
No longer working Working fine on other devices but freezes and restarts whole device on tab S t805 since I got lollipop. Really need fix to get it back to 5 stars
Doesn't work Stopped working with my Galaxy S5 and doesn't work with my Galaxy S6
Recent activity How bloody hard can it be, LinkedIn I don't give a shit about what happened a week ago, even if that's the top content
Becomes unplayable after you run out of soldiers. I thought you'd get more over time but no you have to buy them or hope a Facebook friend will play the game and give you more
Collection of ads Uninstaled...
What even I have watched Sims 3 playthroughs on youtube and they are nothing like this. What a rip off
A Pain Very disappointed in this game. When you click the fruit to match it takes forever to match. What a waste. Game would be good if not for that problem.
Does not work Orientation sensor required. Don't know what more it requires...
My son is heartbroken Doesn't work on Lollipop. I'm as distressed about this as my son is.
Ads OMG with these ads that pop up loudly and you can't stop 100 NOT worth whatever fun the game might have been.
Lollipop Please fix for android 5 lollipop.  I'll rate this game five stars after that.
HORRIBLE AT BEST Just bought this and can't even open it up. Had it for about 8 hours and still can't open it up. DONT GET THIS APP
Plz fix or i wont spend any more money on it no more If could i would give 0 stars it keeps telling me that my internet is not connected every time i try to go to battle plz fix right now or i wont play and spend money on it no more
The scrolling always goes back to the top Every time I click to see a picture on a profile, once I'm done, the profile will scroll all the way to the top again. Very annoying. Fix this please.
What happened to being able to login with Facebook to compete on leader board with friends Doesn't let me choose a level anymore No longer even earn points as you play. Fix it back please
Note 3 and note pro 12.2 I dropped my rating from 5 to 2 stars, do to no support from the developers. Sent 2 emails, with no replies Used to be awesome support for the launcher but not no more.
Fuuu It is the worst game ever i have been
Notification spam Creates spam notifications.
Useless Cannot do anything with the videos. Waste of 2.99
Wont start Just downloaded and it wont even open cause it says it keeps crashing. Would like to play this game but as it stand im giving it a 1 star.
Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty Shitty....Derp
Disgusting Hate it
Too Slow Can you make it more smooth it lags alot and its definitely not my phone that causes this. It's the app
Very bad game It is just wast of time
Love the game, but no save state Great game, runs smooth. But no save state, so if you close your phone in the middle of a 45 min battle, you lose all progress. Extremely frustrating.
Help.....Error Maybe I opened it and it checked for updates then while checking it said check your connection I had 4 WiFi bars and my internet works just fine can some help me
Hated it I would give it a 0 but i had to give it a star to right something
Why can't I train GLADIATORS when I have researched Heavy Infantry level 28 and I have Barracks level 30 It says You cannot train this troop in this city and no list of requirements aside from Gold and Food.
Really Constantly steering left and ads after every load screen Thats crap.
Keeps crashing Used to work until 3 weeks ago and now it says things like cannot connect to server even though I am connected, and it also keeps crashing. Really thought this was a 5 star app until 3 weeks ago, now I'm just annoyed with it.
Waste of data I dont know why such worthless apps are being created
Pathetic app Get a new developer to design a decent app and maintain it. Absolute joke how pathetic this version is, from being ugly and cumbersome to navigate to just plain not working.
Useless Why does it work on ios but not on android as a free app. Please fix this ASAP.
Too many issues I liked the game itself,the constant loading issues are very annoying.Game is updated,WiFi available,still keeps stopping. Work on the constant network issues and I will increase the rating,until then 2 's
So bad yr
Doesn't work Force closes all the time. The fact that I paid for this and its doing this upsets me even more. Please fix
Glivh This game is stupid it all west stoping wen um in online.please fix it
very good Its make the children to know the stories of birbal and akbar
Wired Not even close to a realistic game.
Not happy You have time to push even more ads now. But still can't fix the crashing...
Sucks Everything is locked
Poor user interface No context of who's move it is on resuming, can't see topic on daily double, freezes requiring battery pull, and no multiplayer online.  1990 design.
Can't play the game at all. Loads to 65, click sign in as guest. Didn't work. Sign up and verified my account with kabam, tried to login to the game, didn't work.
Need a refund of my acorns I bought acorns and now they restarted my account...i want the to refund atleast the acorns....
Mnet Download but no magic only blank screen  Did it 4 times all the same Nothing 
Don't like it I prefer the old version which I can see my picture profile and other profile picture in one screen chat only And the space for picture profile is very small,the circle could not accommodate picture from large screen phone
PROBLEM It was working well untill recent update now it won't even turn on pls fix
The page doesn't work and links are gone
Loved it but... Been playing it for months, latest update says 'failed to initialize hardware' and refuses to run on my TF101. If it's not compatible it shouldn't have downloaded an update. How do I roll back
Any one can cheat.... what a game.... hatzz offf.....
Dirt bike king The game is good, QUIT TRYING TO SELL ME LEVELS. THE APP SUCKS BALLS.  They constantly try and sell you stuff, other games, levels, mods, and coins.  F this
Pop ups prevent winning The game wouldn't be bad if the stupid pop up ads didn't interupt in the middle of the song and make you mess up. Bullshit
I want my refund. Thank you.
THE BEST I HAVE USED ON 8 SUPERPHONES AND KEPT THEM ALL SAFE AND IT'S NOW ALSO VERY TRENDY LOOKING DOES NUMEROUS OTHER FUNCTIONS AS WELL 100s LG HE
Wow I always play the games before letting my kids. The very first ad to pop up after about 1.5 min asked if I'm addicted to opiates Really On a kids game
like it much but has much problems when i playing this it is so slow and sometimes it crash and it's always has glitches and when i gonna buy some few things it's disappeared when i play pls fix it so when i download it again i will rate you 5 stars
fun at first then a blank square keep appearing in the middle of the screen, uninstalling fixed it which also deleted all past work, but then after a while the square came back
Very poor service by nimbuzz group application some time hang call voice is very poor I have face problem Facebook connecting last 3 months please service.
Please put back the sliding function. They said the dual page problems were resolved, but it still has. Don't do any patch. You guys is messing your app.
Wtf Have no clue what you guys did to it but this game is terrible now. Was originally amazing idky you changed it to this crap. This game is now a total waste of time.
New update sucks The new update constantly crashes. Have the note 3 with no other apps running and always kicks me out of game.
Bugs after update Was working fine before but after the recent update it's not as smooth as before. It lags. AND IT'S MESSIN WITH MY PHONE IT TAKES TOO MUCH TIME TO CLOSE AND IT'S FREEZING MY PHONE I think I will uninstall it now  
Broken Auto fight needs to send off hits faster. having 6 seconds at max without it firing makes you lose fights in pvp arena.
Really I bought gold membership. I got everything. But a few minutes later, it all just disapeared Now I have to buy everything again I would like a refund of 1.99
What is this
Looks like the devs gave up No updates to this games in months, and the last two regions they released only had one level each. This seems how glu operates and they can't be trusted.
x5 e53 4.8is 2005 no 4.8 engine on the list to choose from
Stupid It's not even a game it is just some stupid info about some stupid trains. NEVER INSTALL IT.
What even is this Some of the answers are just ridiculous and some are not even a word
Themes Elephant's teeth i got to know about this app through facebook...  there is no such Zip theme plus the themes are not that much interesting as i saw on facebook... disappointed...
Not refreshing even on manual refresh... I would like to get a refund pls... ur widget is not updating right even if I  set it to 1hr refresh and not refreshing even if i do a manual refresh...
Booooooooo U can never do it all it ever do say acses denied wtf this app sucks whoever made is foolish and a big idiot what ever I'm out Sya peeps and it's stupid don't wast your time kk
Update causes more issues Update removes the minimise button for the keypad, making it impossible to unlock phone. Nothing but issues, wish this was an optional app.
J'habite a Maurice et l'appli gulli ne marche pas
Good app, but a few problems. Completely started me over from level 26, to level 1. I love the game but please fix this issue.
Ad central My 2 year old can stay on this program for 5 seconds before hitting an ad that sends him to all places on the Internet having nothing to do with kids But for 2.99 mon you can remove the ad Not worth it deleting this immediately
Hated it
No fair their greedy This game is weird like they want us to pay for  for the dang levels like aren't they making enough money with the spongebob shows like the heck like wat ever company this is let them know this is worthless and they r greedy
App not good How could you work the app if it doesn't even work
Can't detect touch When I try to jump this genius just goes away sliding. And he just suddenly slows down and falls down Logic
Don't buy this game It doesn't work when ever I try to log on it wouldn't let me. I want my money back.
Omg Are you kidding me this game looked so cool but don't let it fool you I keep putting makeup on her and then when I go dress her up the makeup is not even there it keeps on happening
I don't get it   I really don't get it how do you play
I hate I don't like it there is only 1 of the pets on my tab you can play on and it's pumkin cinderellas pet and the rest of them are asleep so I deleted it as soon as possible
This game is not working. I hate  this game.
Will not  install on galaxy tab 2 tablet Keep gettimg an error that it cannot install on sd card or usb device. My son loves the Dr Panda games but this one doesent work
It wont even let me download. .
Awful update This update is terrible, the colour scheme is dreadful go back to black and green, all broadcasts lag, sound is always out of sync, I can't search for anyone, I can't view topics. All round dreadful, change it back
It's kinda good but I dislike it... Its an OK game I didn't like it that much I gave it a dislike because all you do is race and it gets kind of old and boring so if u can make better and not boring more changes that would be great
Kill kill kill youst yoking for 1 its 55555555
Don't pay for it as you will still get ads. It's a huge rip off
Freezes My game freezes after completing the waterfall in Act1 the library milkshake land. I am so disappointed after the higher cost of this game. Have emailed and will wait and see  I was enjoying it immensely until then. Such a shame.
Where is sketchbook I had sketchbook on my note3 and now I can't find it and it's the only app missing from my app. I should always have access to an app I paid for and this app pales in comparison
Shit
Suck why do you have to use your finger to go the direction that you wanna go and what's up with the money thing not every one is rich and level 16 at a 250 game with a elcrtic ball you suck to go agasint a level 7 and blow the out what the hell
Horrible
Bugs Won't even let me pass lvl 2. Broke the window, have the shoe laces and the paper clip but won't let me get the hedge cutters
The game crashes Every time that an add comes the game completely crashes You guys need to fix that because i cant play it at all It is crashing all the time With this kind of quality you guys wont be able to get a 5 star rating from people
Waste of money This always gets frozen after some percent scan and couldn't pass that. Also retrieves duplicate photos and even the non deleted ones. Not helpful and wasted money on this crap.
Worst Bus tracking ever It is if the bus tracking app has a life of its own. Zoom is kak, and you cannot read the names of the stations on the map.
Doesnt work on my tablet Samsung tab 2, I can hear the  sound but the screen is blank
Soo laggy, even if you check the person they can shoot from far away and still make it......very disapointing. Dont waste your money on this
I hate what they did to this game. When it was just you playing against the computer it was awesome. Now they put these stupid characters in there to F it all up. I am glad I still have the old version on my other note.
Don't like it don't get it dumb game don't you waste your time on this game Same
Network error ruins arena events How could you guys consider an error in establishing connections to be the player's fault After losing streaks so many times because of this, I begin to think you guys aren't serious in maintaining this game.
LACK OF PROMO it has an offer wall that of you comply it does not give you the gems you deserve the game owes me like 3,000 gems and nothing.
This game suck This game ant no good at all .all it does is play for 5 min,s and stop and the lame part is you have to buy the game and all my free game play just fine and I spent over 300 dollars on this game I should get all my money back
Boring boring boring clothes are cool but no interactions must be for 2an under
Podcasts are behind a few weeks or months Seems like im having a few troubles getting all my podcasts to sync. Some podcasts are about 45 episodes behind and when i use another podcast to check, they are all up to date except for Pocket Casts.
WTF A piece of shit. Saying more is waste of time.
Bakwassssssss
Has gotten worse with each update. Freezes constantly. Don't waste your time
A limit of how much pictures you can heart an hour. There is a max limit to heart each hour. Seriously That's so pathetic.  GET PINTEREST GUYS. ITS BETTER.
Update ruined it Now it doesn't acknowledge that I have the donation version. Won't let me hibernate system apps, and keeps trying to hibernate apps that I already hibernated. Ready to uninstall.
Requires Internet connection Though the game is quite good  but Can't play it without Internet. Utter waste of space.
Not my kind of game Way to many ads. Uninstalled
Problems transferring game data I can't get the data from my tablet to my phone I'm stuck on level 1 box 1 on phone but on tablet I'm almost half way through season 2 plz help and I will give 5 stars
Scary af So i wanted to try some stuff out on my own and im on level 3 and she is still a baby and if you cover the camera her eyes look up until you move your finger away from it
confused This will not go past the introduction screen. Why would I spend 8 and I can't even see what activities my 2 year old would be playing. Uninstalling now.
special bus i like excetive move
Loads maybe half of any given page Loads only gray squares for most of the pages of all of my comics. How you expect anyone to use this app is beyond me.
Downloaded and nothing. No sound. Beautiful App, but useless.
Money I can't get money from the game , i just get money from pension and thats sucks , fix it
This app is  very convincing,  but it wont open. DON'T DOWNLOAD.  WASTE OF TIME
Omg It sounds like crap
Too expensive Amazing game I would pay 5 dlls no more to unlock All features, but 99.99 dollars to get 350k coins is crazy. That is one Xbox game plus all dlc packs or my phone bill plus enough to go to the movies twice.
What's the point if it can't determine direction Looks very nice but direction is way off... it thinks SE is N. Can't find a way to calibrate. Boourns.
It sucks You can't do any thing
IT'S A TRAP My 3 year old enjoyed it for 2 seconds then BAM her comes the you need to pay for this and that. One lame section isn't worth the memory.
Good game. Starting to have problems though. Really loved the game... But for the last month or so its been having game play issues. Had to uninstall and reinstall to get it to work. Have to do that every time I play an event or bonus game. Smh
Retarded Doesn't matter what device but the on screen keyboard does not display properly, preventing me from playing because you cannot get past that screen.  You absolutely have to enter a name.  So dumb.
No longer work After the Android 5.1 update this app no longer starts. It crashes out during the start up animation. Please fix
Why does it not show the name of the person I'm sending to Why doesn't it show the name of the person I'm sending to
Doesn't work. This game doesn't work.. And therefore I would like a refund. Please respond.
Again won't open 1.0.6 I don't know why none of your games will open on my tablet anymore. They used to work.
All american foods Most people outside america wouldnt see half these foods. The scoring is also a bit unfair try cutting it back to 100 instead of 30
For a game that cost money This game is way too glitchy. It's impossible to finish some missions and level up guys. There should be an option to pay to skip missions
It won't let me follow people It was fine in the beginning but now I can't follow anyone.  Fix it if not im uninstalling.  And people shouldn't download this if its gonna do that.
Boring.. This is so sick I hate it, why can't there be more clothes
Sucks
MONEY Buttttt.....WHY DO U HAVE TO BUY STUFF FOR REAL MONEYU SHOULD NOT PLAY THIS RUBBISH
Just hated I am not able to play the locked levels otherwise it's not bad
 
Download Can't download the additional content. I have lots of storage space both on internal and SD card.
FIX THE BUG THAT IS SHUTTING GAME DOWN OPEN GO TO PLAY SCENE AND FIND ONE ITEM AND BOOM SHUTS DOWN AND OFF OVER AND OVER AGAIN. SICK OF IT
Deleted App after 1 day
 
No support for fragmentation Will only recover 1min of audio files... Useless...
Still locks up all the time 61915 Locks up, was fun while it played.
No longer working It worked great the first time but has gone to the white screen. I have uninstalled, restarted my galaxy tab, and reinstalled. I think my grands will love it once it is fixed.
Good app not working in lollipop Please patch it for first gen nexus 7at least.
5star reat this aap Very good
Doesn't work Have had this a while. Now after update just goes to a blue screen on startup. Cannot play. A waste of time.
Fix this please I love the game as i do on the computer but when i try to talk to others the talk bubble does work. I have to press it ten million times for it to work. It got so bad i had to delete it.
Well organized but too noisy to hear anything, who approved it anyway
Too hard for little ones. Great show, app stinks.
Restore Purchases   Double purchase does not work please fix
uphill racing. okinnana met. Nagalas. My 60,000 coins vanished when i upgraded from jeep to concept but did not get the concept car. Sucks. Rate this half star, falling star
I owns a dstv waker this app is not working for my tabel
Does not work I cant open the app it gets up to a part that says tap to jump on the menu and then crasnes google is not accepting my reports
Doesn't  work The game loads but as soon as it gets to the home screen it is blank with background music. You  can only access the settings button.
stupid u bozos u stupid bozozs i hate bozos and u all bozos fck u all bozos im not happy
So many ads Seriously spamy even after turning partner ads of and buying the game.
Crash melulu Ini dkit dikit crash..dkit dikit force stop..mohon di fix yaa developer  nanti alu kasi 5 bintaang 
I WANT MY MONEY BACK IT WONT LET ME PLAY THE GAME
Cant play random people Dont buy this app. You can no longer play random people Its dumb. Not everyones facebook friends play this game.
Bubble shooter glitches Waaay too many glitches. Some levels are designed for you to lose many times over. Don't like how it calls you a loser when you lose a level rather than just say lose. Would be lots more fun once all these are corrected.
Boring.... Very boring game....
Doesn't work Won't download on my galaxy s3
Waste of time Horrid gameplay experience
Cant find resources after the game completed the download and install, it shows up a goat simulator content downloader witch the tells me content cannot be download because the resources cannot be located. Please help.
Hate it do not get this app freezes won't let you talk to people glitches makes you start over it freezes when you do certain action I do not recommend this app to anyone
Very hard Oops i hit it very hard no thing is working kkkkoop meanes no no do not download
Unskippable Ads An update added obstructive ads you can't back out of. This used to be my favorite app. Now it's uninstalled.
Do not get this app Well it's pretty cool. It doesn't help you play songs it just makes you want to play So if you ask me you shouldn't get this app
Please help. Before i changed my phone i purchased every option. And after changing it, everything disappeared. If you fix that i will rate 5 stars. Thank you
Ads Why are there ads in the paid version of my game I wouldn't have bought this app had I known I'll eventually get ads anyway. It's a shame because it's a fun  simple game that me and my toddler enjoy.
Doesn't work properly on  Micromax A104.
Are ye to mooje 2 crore se direct 1000 pe laya aur use din se ek baar bhi uper nahi aaya i hate
There is much needed to work on Try making it possible to republish ads instead of using browser
Crap Tiles are illegible
0 stars Would give it 5 stars if you would fix the game stopping every time my 6yr old tries to collect 7th day prize
Ice age Crashed twice now worked hard to get stuff all gone like game but sick of starting over will not spend  anymore money to lose it all again
Buttons are hard Game is suck adds are shit
Will not install Won't work or open on tablet or  Android. Would like a refund.
Stopped Every time I open it, says unfortunately snow cone maker or whatever it is called has stoppedit get so flipping Mad
Coins Love the game until today my guest account isn't working and I just got up to 112000000 last night now the game is not working
Rip off doesn't work Payed for this and it doesn't work when you.  Click on it,it just says loading and never does.Total waste of money and disappointment for my son who wanted to play it.
I can't download It keeps giving me an error. I forget the error code I think it was 905. It would love to play this game and enjoy It, but alas I cannot at the moment. Plz halp.
My chopper crashed and my data went with it This thing doesn't save Also no free play
Awful Terrible app. And, lots of you are idiots,,, there phone Where phone,,,,,, try their phone. And no it does not work. Intrusive obnoxious adds. The only thing it is good for  is add spamming, which it is very effective at.
It's good service for the people, Srilanka
Not insured user Not able to use app anymore. All info recorded lost.
Google rip off Billed three times to different companies repeatedly. I hope profile is fake I can't talk to the woman if this is real it's cruel to treat people like this. Sorry I ever thought this was more than a scam
0s 1 Doesn't show whether a tweet has been sent or not. As soon as I press enter the message disappears .       2 Locating previous contacts after re installation is absolutely dismal.
Im stuck in the wall Entered a cave now im stuck between 2 walls with no way out. Dafuq kind of bug is that.
You have to pay You get the first month free but have to pay after that. That i don't have an issue with it is the fact they ask for credit card details stright up before even trilling the app. I haven't even tried the app itself not sure how secure.
Spam Bought paid version years ago. Recent update has brought ads and daily spam notifications. Deleted  trying to find an old version until fixed.
Good Good good good good good good good good good
Fix this app Sony Sony needs to fix this app now How can you keep selling this app when you know there is an issue You can't chose letters when solving a puzzle. MAKES THE GAME UNPLAYABLE FIX THIS APP ASAP OR REFUND ME SONY
3 things boring,to many adds ,and not challenging    
My download can't past 90 Please assist
Bakwaas. Duniya ka sabse ghatiya game hai bhai log.waist of mb
Sucked I gave it a 1star because I press on the key's but didnt let me go on and each time i want to just dont
Hello Get rid of these ads.  The blinking just makes me not pay any attention.  Never will use them.  How annoying can you get.  Get real.
This is the worst app I have ever downloaded. It says to do something like tap to continue and it don't do nothing else. Such a stupid app.
Not happy Used to work fine but now it lags heaps and doesn't load closes down to home page, needs to be fixed
This game will freeze your phone instantly do not I repeat do not download this
it is closing automatically plz fix it
Plssss plss download this app.. Its rubbish...
Epic Fail Bought the Pro Edition. Backed up to ext USB and nothing to restore Also will not connect to Google Drive 
Wrong locations After deleting this app then reactivating my account... my location is so far off I can't find anyone local... its annoying and makes me just want delete it again
I can't even play it.the game is loading but after its finish loading it just quits its so rude hate this game
Update fail Great game until I allowed update. Now it won't open, just stays on title page loading. Hoping for a fix
My 2 stars has nothing to do with harem manga. It may be hard to get the manga pages to load on my tablet browser. But at least I can search for manga to read by title and genre.
This game is no good anymore. Ripped me off today twice  couldn't load my bonuses its still not allowing me. Fix this you owe me a few 150.000 for all my levels....
Been playing for almost two hours and there are no bonus and it says mega win when you win 3xs your bet very sad
uh man i used to play this game on my pc but on my galaxy y duos it hangs it takes so much space and one time the machines were missing plzz fix it seriously developers plz requesting u
Issue with internet banking Canara bank web portal is not completely viewable i cannot even type my user id or password
Cant advance Ok game, but even though i clear the levels, when I get killed I have to start from the beginning 
Terrible The missing icons, and that's most look terrible. If you are going to design icons like this you need a convincing masking system or do a he'll of alot more icons. If the devs not happy with this email me and I'll send pics
Won't even let me login every time  I try it tells me it's unable  to login
Easy play It's a child's play
Bulsht Don't waste your data,its really annoying app
Wont let me deactivate I do not have anymore space on my phone and I really want to delete this so I can update my Wattpad. But every time I press 'deactivate' it keeps on saying 'Must deactivate before uninstaling' and I dislike it. 
Don't like update I don't like update since it does not keep score any longer. When I paid for it it kept score. Also it does not have difficulty levels as clear as before the update . Please bring back the original game I paid for
System crashes on Samsung s4. Love the pc app but this software is buggy
   Gps            
Absolutely awful. Awful game there are no instructions and no reverse it's awful don't bother installing you'll just be disappointed.
Can't back up my achievements They should make the expense of their game worth it. And not being able to backup my achievements does not.
Stop It keeps on loging me out
Sneakers are gone All the releases are gone. Did you update the app or something
Sad This is a huge disappointment. I expected a good quality game but all I got was a low resolution, hard to understand, boring game. Do not pay money for this.
Good game but it doesn't let you win enough to play and bonuses are small. Wish you could actually play for longer than 2 minutes.
Doesn't work whatsoever on asus zenfone 2 Exactly as i said. Worked perfectly on my xperia z ultra before I switched phones.
Worst game ever Literally The worst game I've every played, it doesn't allow me to move the character instead the little ball thing that moves him had a mind of its own wtf literally going the opposite way. Thanx for wasting my time.
It won't let me login I love this game,but I got a new phone and it won't let me login our even play as a guest.  Please fix
Win the team of INDIA I will pray for u . Best of luck.
PayGate not active Would not let me purchase my credit report, apparently the PayGate account is not active, so basically a waste of time
game progress lost why there is no way to sync game progress its great that theres no need to consider to keep on playing it after reinstalled on new phone. uninstalled right away 
Cannot play...Crashes most of the time.. Please fix this crashing bug...everytime i try to open the game its freezes..most of the time..i have other games that runs fine and smooth...please fix..then i will give a 5 star
Is a good game ,but can get on my nerves cos every once in a while it keeps freezing on me
Same problems as others here 24 hr clock keeps resetting and music player shuts off every time the game is opened. In endless Maps not paying just to get past level 61. Was awsome game till this hiccup
Finish one round exits outs of game get that fixed with the adds that pop up at the most random times so I accidentally click on them need to go annoying as hell
Liked I did enjoy playing this game but now it takes forever to start and when it comes up all I get is a blank screen. Very unhappy and disappointed.....
Great, short game I was thoroughly enjoying this game and it's  immersion until I realized that it is just one chapter in the story. Maybe 2 hours of play for 5 is the return I like to get from my purchases.
wtf did I download it's not like the picture AT ALL. the lasers just make noises vibrate, big disappointment.
Not working Can someone please fix it is not even working every time i pull it up the screen goes black..please fix i am starting to get agitated
Useless Get Could not move file error when trying to move files from ed card to phone storage. Even just moving one file. Also, nags every few seconds to give feedback do you like our app. Annoying, useless, uninstalled. HTC Amaze.
Disgusting Even after cancelling the trip the driver called that he has reached to pick me up. Just a poor app..in simple english.
Doesn't work No activity after loading
Great app. Has stopped dowloading info recently on galaxy s4
Loses Connection Ever since the last update it gives me nothing but problems.  Constantly loses Connection and when you think you have it working it freezes and screen says device disconnected.  Please fix this as I would like to enjoy it again.
Can't print or save to camera roll Please tell me how to print to my wireless printer or how to save to the camera roll. I hope I didn't just waste 3.99. When I click the buttons, nothing happens at all.
You never win Like the computer always wins I will give it a better rait if u fix that
Worst game ever not even opening properly Bekar
Solitaire Like the game but can't stand the ads after each game  I would rather pay for the game and do away with ads for things I would NEVER buy
Lol Are you people really that dumb that you thought a laser would shoot out of the phone When you bought your phone, did it come equipped with a laser This is just a mindless children's app. Idiots...
SUCKS You only get 5 options
Still have some problems. MOST of the app works but some things keep saying there is a problem with app please send email. But when I do,  the email wont send the file. Good thing a didnt spend a lot on this app.
does not work on android 5 lolipop
Wrong If you click on a game and by accident click off it takes your tokens. And it does not let you play the game.
Really boring knock off of flabbybird
I would give five stars but... It won't accept my answer FLINESTONES so please fix it ..and my answer is correct
What's the point of purchasing this app if you still have adds
Worst game ever This game needs more development to improve not just graphics. Also fluidity on movements of the characters.
Missing feature There is no cast screen feature on my galaxy s4.  I looked it up and many, many people also have this issue.  There better be a good reason why they STILL haven't fixed it by now.
bad you game verybad. all the time sending report but no posible working. you very bad. i try one i try two but no work good . work always bad . always stucking. game not download. headache . very terrible play . thenkyou
Wont save creations I like the concept of the game, but my creations wont save...ill mold my forest the way i want, and when i come back to it, its nothing but a few trees.  what is this Is it suppose to be like that
 Bad too much loading i didn't play yet from the loading pliz fix and than i will rate 5 pliz
Been playing for so long and can't get close to enough coins to play the slot games were you need 100000 minimum coins to play, have never got a jackpot to unlock the higher levels.
dont have any meaning and so hard to play
Bishwa nath It is vary vary work ful app
Freezes during play Horrible app. Keeps locking up during play. Absolutely no response back from the creators of this app  that used to be fun somewhat rigged but now you can't even play a full hand  this app SUKS
It's not the best Should have read the reviews first.. Some of the photos look nothing like the movie  it's very hard to guess them because of that reason. Uninstalling.
Lion heart I lost all my coins,unlocked characters,gems and my much hardwork since last update....Hope u guyz to fix it early as possible... I am feeling so disappointed by this u must fix this 
It only plays the other hand a u can't hear what u play
Note4 This app now got issues you submit with photos get feedback approval without pictures what's dat developers fix dat on next update promise 5stars
Bad bad bad Won't load, can't open very angry 3 year old and mum so mad
What the hell Great game but i dont get it. How many more times do i have to play in the same day I've played the tournaments on 4.11.2013 like 10 times each. What do i have to do for the day to change
Painfull and frustrating Poor quality. Slow loading. Bonus games are pathetic. No special anything's with the free games. You will unistall.
Hate it I will take stick cricket over this game anyday. Horrible gameplay, and not much to do. Some batting moves you are not able to perform and is hard even if the difficulty is set on easy. Horrible, hands down
whaaattt ttthhheee heelll i've reached level 190 above  after update .. iy has started from the beginning... wt the hell plz plz plz plz fix this
Uninstalls itself after opening The app immediately uninstalls itself upon opening on my Samsung Galaxy S5 with a paired Samsung Gear smartwatch. This is a longstanding issue that has precluded me from using this app on this device.
Cant log in Please fix this problem. Its been doing this for some time now.
This is the best app but Has been filtered in iran..
The thought the light would come out of the phone...... Like in the picture..... I was so disappointed when I did it If you are reading this comment, don't waste your time with this app....
Thisgame sucks We all DO have a reliable connection you jerks This game FAILED HARD 
App freezes I love this game and play all the time. However, recently, the app has started to freeze as soon as someone plays their first line of trains.
 Guys I have a strong WiFi connection but it keeps telling me that I'm not connected. I don't know what to do and I really want to play this game .
Fck Game play doesn't match with your coverpic fcku
U need to fix this game Running slow. I don't like it no more gta v is better
Great game, big problem After update game immediately crashes when I open it
Nah When I donwload Tha From new Phone alredy Sign in Google account Ive purchased many Planes But when I see the plane list all of them must bee payed again What the heck man Waste of money
VESA Managing
The smart list update makes it hard to find anything, nothing is in any sort of order that makes sense
Bought it, can't access lessons I bought this last night, and I still cannot access all of the lessons. It says buy all lessons for 199, but Google play says I already own it. 5 stars when fixed.
Ruined I'm addicted to BR , reading about 100 stories a day , but I can't load new stories now . Please fix it .
Every time I try to do a song it says I must be a vip player and if not it sends me back to the home page and says an error has occurred. I'm not going to pay 7 to dance when I can play it on my wii with no worries. I'm done with this fricken game
Absolute garbage Quite possibly the worst worms rip off I've ever seen. Horrible aiming mechanics, terrible selection of weaponry, and overall a Grundy feeling sort of game. This game is free and still i feel i paid too much for it
Won't even download Uggghhhhhhhh
Bakwas ha
I want all my money back I tried to play this game today in a message pop up and said it was an unlicense wedding dash error. Wth
Don't bother downloading Its stupid and boring. I had it for a half hour and I regret wasting that much time of my life. Uninstalling.
New version is annoying The adverts which pop up are very frustrating. If I have my phone on silent for multimedia the adverts still come on at full volume. Fax it please Previous version was excellent.
Terrible It won't even let me in once I created a character it shot me out the app. I have tried over 10 times. I wish I could give this app a zero. If the fix it I will give it a better rank
Very bad Waste app no one replies properly to ur text everyone say just one word hai and go off  Waste app
Game good but But playing with off spinner is damn tough can't predictable. Just improve on that
Good game BUT Just like with Westbound addicting game but can't advance due to constant server crashes and the need to complete offers for or buy swords.
Boo The controls suck please fix or im uninstalling it
Crashes often Worked fine for a while, now it always crashes or won't even open.
Worst Apps I've ever used
All my stuff is gone I bought a fair amount of inapp purchases but when my phone broke and i got a new one, i cant restore my purchases
So bad Allways crashing so adds no levels
Grossly inaccurate There are over 90 of fixed cameras MISSING in my county of England, 100 of mobile camera sites missing, and zero of the other safety related warnings.  Therefore, this app is worse than USELESS.
BAD
Meu filho adora os videos, mas depois do ultimo upgrade perdi todo o contedo que havia comprado e uma verso em ingls apareceu no meu telefone. Um absurdo
Needs quick improvements This game sucks. We should be allowed to buy a vowel while trying to solve the puzzle. And if we don't get it, the system should tell you the word, phrase.
I hate it It won't stop going to slick craft and slick craft is ugly and horrible
Needs work Keeps telling me I need at least 10 characters. I have like 100. Tells me to complete all sections when I have. So therefore I can't list.
wont load just main screen
What is this crap How is this game even in the store The balls are squares with a circle in the middle, this is so weird and stupid. Not smooth at all
Crap dice I expect the dice would be more like moodoo marble or Line's let's get rich. It's still random, but at least have a little bit more control than this. It always give me bad numbers always go to snake. Maybe my expectation is too high.
Halarious I scared my mom and dad so good they were both cleaning dishes and bam They jumped 
Keeps force closing Can't even get inside to play the game... I'm not taking the refund because I believe in you guys but please don't let me down. I have a ZTE Android phone.
It won't even open on my nook without crashing Only one star dude like its not for nooks
Wacky wacky wack... I can make even better app than this.... What a waste of time...
I hated it it freezes and takes you to the store and won't let you go back there is more pets than people are saying but I hate it
Runs slow on Galaxy Note 4 ATT. I don't know what has been changed but it has introduced a serious amount. After fully completing origins I decided to give it a go again.
New update is garbage. An excellent team is a poor team speed wise now. Keeps having errors and getting booted off. Fix before the new madden comes out or I won't play the new one . Fed up
Issues when entering post code I am unable to enter a full post code. Once I have entered the first part of the postcode e.g NN8 then both the letters and the numbers are greyed out and won't let me select them to enter the rest of the postcode
Cant join any online Cant join any online games with my gameloft live account but when I sign in with Google plus I find one right away pls fix all my data is on gl account
Refund   I bought today, I want refund.. what is the purpose of buying this app without the capability to back up whatsapl, wechat, line.. big fail.. refund please
Absolutely Not I tried to uninstall can't even do that impossible please help or I need. The extra space , phone now secured
Pop ups The constant game pop ups BAD IDEA really annoying please make them way  smaller on the side without the annoying noise trust me we see them no need to make them  explosive .
Huge delays Moving map touch screen has delays so bad app cannot be used as intended updates make it worse have contacted xample many times with no solution I have ios version on ipad it works well android useless dont buy
Not what i wanted I thought it was gonna teach me how to play piano..THIS GAME SUCKS.
I want a refund This game is too bright and way too easy my 1yr old brother finished this game in 10mins.
BOOOOOOO It don't do anything it won't make a sound and it takes tooooooo long to the voices
It does not make sense The graphics and the game on its own has problems
It bad Boo it's bad
Good, but... The game looks pretty good but it lags a lot and crashes frequently. I can only play one round before it crashes, I have to keep restarting the game. New obstacles are sometimes confusing and result in unfair deaths.
Latest update This is the 2nd update I've done and expected new levels on full  version and  theres nothing. Used up phone data for nothing. Please fix...
No bonus spins Why are the games so tight. I hardly ever get bonus spins anymore. ..why
Okay but needed more No zoom, cant draw and fill colors on it. Sketching is very slow. Line appears after I draw it
Still unable to get pastthe initial screen  Huawei phones don't seem to have the luck of being able to run this game yet, as i still crash out right after the initial sign in screen 
Horrible app stuck in the 90's Reminds me of Windows ME. No NFC or mobile payment or recharge of cards. Basically just duplicates the info on the website. Bus tracker inaccurate, and thus useless. The shitty website is better.
Unistalled My phone restarted and became unusable after installing the new update. Had to hard reset and a lot of pain. My phone is motox 1st gen.
CAN'T FOLLOW ANYONE. This is ridiculous as hell. I can't follow people or even post publicly on my own profile because everything is always glitched. I like google, but this is just now starting to tick me off. FIX THIS BUG.. the update did nothing
I hate this It gives you wrong answers this sht its helpful but when it comes to correct answers dont download this coz you will wasting your time
Need more instruments without paying Only one Instrument on the free app.
So many ads Constant interruption from ads, some if which are videos with audio that you can't skip. Constantly nagging to rate or invite friends. Not worth it
Like the game, best golf game out there. But almost impossible to get new gear with spending real cash. And as of the last update I now get a 30 second advert before each round. Will probably lead to uninstall.
Great concept but Technically very bad app,it never updates location,it shows a message relocating successfully but always shows wrong locations of family. Resolve it and get 5 stars.
Took everything I broke my other phone and had to replace and had over 40k points and lost all of it
Does not Chromecast or Google Cast Does not Chromecast or Google Cast. The TV will display the Slingplayer logo and connecting, but screen turns black. No audio or video.
WTF used to work but now it does nothing, on all 3 devices. i have a feeling this guy only tests the app on his htc and not samsung or nexus
Hate it forever... Wow I try to wake them with money but rlly still sleeping... u only get five pets I think the best ones are locked and just wow........ can't believe this..
The basic app works great but I bought an add on and now it wont let me unfollow anyone from the app. I have to hunt them down on instagram to do it. Which wouldnt normally bug me but i paid for extra feature and now the basic doesnt work. Fix it.
Ok At first its fun. After a while it gets really boring. I wish I can have a refund I spent like 10 bucks on money and 3 bucks on the game. Honestly if you have a busy life don't buy this it gets boring. And a waste of money
no cheats like other sims OUTRAGES seriously we need a cheat code mode and at least have like saved files my old d.s. is better than this freaking game.....maybe till they add it I'm keeping it at a 2 rating it's not worth my time
Nexus 6 broken  Immediately closes on startup Unsure if this is model specific or android 5.0.  My daughter loves this app. 5 star otherwise.
Could be great Doesn't offer full episodes and every interface of application is very limited. Uninstalled application.
Used to love it but now the auto Playlist is stuck. No way to pick videos. Please fix this
Best I love the collection of dresses oh oh my goshh It's so nice game no complained about it
Mango man
Lngsamt Har blivit oanvndbart lngsamt p sista tiden.
Maintenance We'll back in 2 hours. What is the maintenance as u ppl are doing. It's almost been 1 complete day. Please start the game.
Sims 3 Hi please could you fix the code it keeps saying marmalade error it won't even go past the green icon thanks
Freezes up after every race, very fun game but having to restart this app after each race is really getting old
Good but needs more Needs more manga then that amount. I feel like its only choosing only the top listed one then others. Please add more then that. Thank you
bad game ever fix it asap until this game looks like fifa .
Paying for other book I bought this and then paid for an additional ABCs book. So far it's been downloading for over 15 minutes. AVOID THIS APP.  Editors choice my A. It's obviously unattended. No network issues on my end just garbage on their end.
Fatal issue on nexus 10 On my nexus 10 the game screen shrinks to 14 size when I move a piece to the bottom of the screen. The game still runs. But placing pieces is difficult from then on.
Not work In my lenovo a7000. Android 5.0 lollipop
stuck data downloading three times i've tried download this game data, and it always stuck about 9096. Zenfone 5
Eh My son liked it for a week
This should be open to anyone like on iphone
It sucks Dont get this app unless you want a phony lazer. It doesnt actually shoot lazers out of your phone. DO NOT GET IT
The app stops working  Since the new update the app would throw me out and display the 9gag has stopped working.Rather frustrating really as the apps rather good.Please fix.
This game is disgusting please stay away Very bad
It's not good When I give my email ID it says its not correct
Pointless This app is terrible. If your child does not ALREADY know how to spell, you'll have to help them with this. A LOT.
I really liked the game Usually doesn't load and when it does it seems as if it waits for you to have a bingo and kicks you out or it lets you pay for card  and kicks you out keeping your tokens to play I uninstalled it.
cause out of control on GC Cup i want to know how can my phone out of control with analog stick when control a player...i have seen round by round...someone have control me out and i can lose easily...can you give a reason drop your comment
Bubble witch saga 2 I pay alot for it U people keep taking my money and it acts up and then I'm suppose to get a refund never once have I if not in 24hr I'm cancelling all ur guys games
It used to work. Froze every once and a while but dealable. Now today I go to get on it and it's not my account even though i just had it connected threw facebook...everything I had over the last year or so gone...
Not Saving Went back to play this after few days and it had to dwnld more addins and my progress wasn't saved.  REALLY REALLY ticks me off.
Daily gives one update but show me what is new additional in this
Never works when you need it. And shows you doing few miles per hour when you not moving.
JUNK HOW DO PEOPLE GET TRILLIONS
Doesn't work Installed app,  tried to use it,  could find me but couldn't find the address. So the request taxi button never lit up. App is useless.
Not fast enough Very frustrating. When I open the app it takes forever before I can actually Shazam a song Ever since the new update when the stupid welcome screen appeared, it takes forever. So annoying
Not fun at all You should charge people for this app that way we'd know the only way to play is if you pay, you buy coins, because you give little to nothing at all. I can't afford to buy coins , so I'll just uninstall this app. Bye
Bakwasssss Too many ads piping up in between controls are not smooth as well. Wasted data on this crap
Got the app for my Colorado ltz storm can't create an account can't do anything... HOLDEN go with google maps or something
Good but bad I give rate u .because u dont hav special guns I try bye a gun bur I not found  why u don't have gun      
No sound I'm good but how can I be if the music doesn't play when I vs people plz fix
Maintenance 2 hours ago, it says that it will be ready in 2 hours' time. How many 2 hours do you exactly mean Stupid app
Rubbish. Doesn't alert you to any speed cameras, fixed or hidden. Waste of money.
Still waiting for proper file browsing File browsing is terrible and the app doesn't appear as an option to open files with when used from a better browser. Unusable for locally stored video libraries of any decent size.
   
Hey, i am disappointed.  I don't play as a professional nor as a gamer.  Still at my level your game sucks. Now i would like to know why you are not responding. ......
This is just bullshit Don't bother yourself downloading it coz it really sucks
Won't open at all for me since the update. I'm a long time user and use this app everyday. Very disappointed. Please fix soon.
Paid advertising Why have me pay then still plug the hell out of your own pages by hiding within tags. You should pay ME to advertise Stick with free version. No difference.
To many gems Everything at the end has to be unlocked with gems..... not worth the down load. 1 star....
I win tournaments and don't receive anything...very disappointing. This happen too many times.
Horsegirl13 This game only goes to level 8 and it goes by so fast so you don't have that much to play....if you fix it and add levels I will add more stars
Crap Developers should be ashamed with what they did to this game. Used to be a good game.
Does not work
Too easy Wasn't a challenge and the amount of times it crashed wasn't funny
Really liked the game but now it won't open on my phone tryed reinstalling it a few times but still nothing which only sucks where it's not a free game fix and rating goes back up 
This app doesn't work every time I dial a number it keeps shuttiing down. Big deception
Kak Ads in a loadshedding schedule Are you serious Like loadshedding isn't bad enough.
Worst app ever Wouldnt accept password to deactivate. Now it doesnt want to install
Controller Great game but a little hard without the ability to use a controller. The game doesn't load if I have a ps4 control connected
Hate Won't even load I have a Samsung s6 edge and once it finally loads when I open it it closed out right after not even making it so I can open the page ridiculous had foe years on my iPhone and worked perfectly .
I don't   like it There are no monsters like in the real minecraft and also like in real minecraft you can't even save ALL your hard work. Whoever created this game please make SOME changes  to  it.
Beautiful. Hands down the most amazing looking of all the sky apps. However it's not very accurate when it comes to reading my phone's sensors.  I can't figure out how to customize anything, there don't appear to be many options or settings
How do i get a refund PLEASE Only plays for a little bit then its stop casting to my smart tv... i wanna know how to get a refund... horrible... rip off
It doesn't work in restricted profile in lollipop It doesn't work at all in restricted profile in lollipop, can not take advantage on restricted users feature for my 3 yo girl
Update sucks Do a better job... it is laggy, and what happened to having outs in a home run Derby Time goes too fast, and I am losing to a computer.. come on now. 5 stars when you fix.
Nice to have but doesn't always work well
Look elsewhere Inept developers, it's a library of cards for christ sake, how dumb are you guys  Maybe I'll check back in a year to see if they've figured out which one is the hole in the ground and fixed this train wreck.
Nevwr opens
Boring Not good.
Doesn't Work HTC ONE8 I have not been able to finish a game, uninstall and reinstall made it worse. Freezes every time. I want my money back, don't waste your money Complete fail Sony.
Don't waste your time This game is not good. Players minimum bet lost all my coins with in 5 minutes
Why it always says  i got 0 score for every quize i took.kuck this app,
Not much to do here.
Useless App keeps on force closing. Until i on my wifi. Your GPS trackers are worst. The cab drivers always got my location wrong. And you always got bad drivers. Improve yourself. Or you gonna face what you have done..
Dude, what is its purpose besides rejecting you I mean, come on It did ''Access Denied'' THE HECK Its called a ''Fingerprint Lock'' not ''Reject Every Fingerprint''. Fix this to where it scans your fingerprint and set it as a lock for your phone.
Wat happened to the money spent I paid to unlock all and was able to play it till recently. Do u mean there is expiry for the paid app Are u able to rectify
RIPOFF  DO NOT BUY Completed in 3 mins. NEVER ever will buy anything from those scammers again.
Stopped working It was working fine last night and now it won't work. I just get a no media message. If this doesn't get fixed I want a refund. Total waste to only be able to use it a few weeks.
Paid for app with adverts Would be a 5 star rating if it wasn't for the in game adverts If I've paid for the game, I would expect there to be no adverts.
Laura Why do I only get to select a few teams  ,don't like this setup
Cant do wnload the game
 Not all the cars are available, and it keeps showing a error with the qr code
Want to like it, but... It's sluggish, slow to start. And, this is a matter of taste, the icon is butt ugly
Needs to update Doesnt show my friends who actually play da game and it doesn't show them in da invite either so basically cant request for lives... UPDATE and maybe youll get 5 stars if the update works
Does not work Managed to finally download it but wont even load, the screens blank. What idiot puts games in here that dont work oO
Hated it HATED I payed for a fun game  not this
The game is cute but is too wide for the Samsung Galaxy S2 Tablet The game is cute but is too wide for the Samsung Galaxy S2 Tablet which renders the game unplayable
Bad.. pls don't download this waste.. Bad very bad
Very buggy on s6 Latest update is very buggy. Crashes and the bluetooth feature is buggy.
Worst game ever This game is so fking lame after u start its hard for u to tilt and its so slow  it makes u crash  . This is.the worst game ever gt gt
Stop the notifucations Disabling them doesn't stop them, I downloaded an IPL app not 'every cricket game in india' app
Crap
BAD Bad very bad like mostly everting is locked n u Hav to purchase it this is a total stupid app do not install it warning
Just a bad clone Annoying music, controls are clunky, don't understand onscreen prompts, very annoying music. Might be better if you could somehow connect a joystick but that's not the vendor's fault.
Doesn't work galaxy kids tablet. I hear the music but the screen is just black.
The adds are so annoying,  and often force stopped. Please fix it.
Useless app... It always points north towards the top of the phone... Whichever direction you are into...
No payout for big win Hit the Big Win should have had 2500 coins but only got 30.... Happend twice so will probably uninstalled. . Kinda takes the fun away 
Same bug appears on Sony Xperia SP as josephw390 has on S4. Only first launch has visible mark, any other try is invisible until complete clear data and of course any progress lost.
Traffic Cams Question What predefined web cams, like Traffic Cameras, are available  Answer Traffic Cameras are listedhere.  This is from your own FAQ and why I bought your bloody app. Where are they mate Do I need to contact Google
Cant log in either Cant log in. Im using the correct details. Please fix footys about to start
Fireman sam Very poor already paid for it and it keeps chucking me off of the game
Crappy I used to love this app but now its really slow and it tends to freeze or disconnect for no reason.
Games is amazing bus since i changed to oneplus one cant play it anymore so now its just waist of money
Cant post ads, always rejected. The new olx sucks, old version was better, it worked. Will only use Gumtree from now on.
Full version Shocking... Writing stays on screen and have to exit to clear screen again on my galaxy s2. Not very happy at all
Refund The app freezes a lot my daughter has not been able to use it for longer than 2 minutes
Update leaves game in ruin Nearly all angel activities cause the game to stop. Will give one maybe two days for developers to resolve. Will delete game if no resolution.
Average It only gave default theme not like creative theme pack like buzz launcher where icon doesnt hv to b icon they could b in text as well.. Not stylish launcher m looking fr.
Crash I'm using Note 4... Crash the game every time just run few seconds. Please fix the bugs.
No legendary cards Played for several months did not get a single legendary card. Don't play it is not worth your time
Dont download this game The waste game I ever seen in my life
No multiplayer mode What's the point if you can't play turn for turn against a friend over the internet
I would probably give it 5 stars if it will be free  plz set up ...
Cheapo really So I have to buy a train,why couldn't you just the other app games and say either buy or win trophy's to get new characters,I guess my nephew would have to stick to toys.  in it for the money right get a life
 
Too much ad Ad pops up every time I tap. It's too much
Poor connectivity This app won't read my 1998 Acura CL that is obd2. Whats the deal where is reads all obd2 protocols, which it does not. Uninstalling.
Boooooooo I deleted my apps for this game but i         could not even beat lynx because of the bombs screw this game. Maybe you guys should add a difficulty
Well crafted, soulless, casual upgrade game Recommended if you like grinding resources mindlessly with no skills or incentives.
Stucks It gone worse with new update. After double tapping for the hover board my phone goes zoom automatically. If that is not resolved I am gonna uninstall
App doesn't even open Bought the app  can't even open it. Not much use as on our way to London, 2 very disappointed kids
Unplayable Need a very high end phone to be able to play this, keeps on crashing when I try to log in. Fix this and I'll change my rating. See no need for this to be unplayable on my phone from looking at the game pictures
Love the game, BUT, can no longer purchase new categories with coins since updating to paid version, tried emailing got no help same with the help center. Please address this
Can't Text. Can't text on droid, and can't open all of the faces on the paid app.  Great when it works, but often it doesn't work.
Keeps crashing I would give the price is right game a great rating but it keeps crashing I paid for this app and every time I play for more then 5 minutes its crashing very upset want my money back please 
There is no games What is there to play with the new game that I just downloaded has no games and I like apps that have a great game of the stuff that the company may put in the game and this app has been a way worse game then the other games
Update  Customer service. This game needs more teams. Beating the same 3 teams over and over again is becoming boring. Plus the customer service in all of Cartoon Network's games are terrible. This can easily be changed.
Galib Not bad
Game is awesome but it force closes so much I can't get pastthe 2nd chapter
Coin moving speed Too slow dear... Even after update 21 version ...its slow ..plz do one thing 4 us ..all good in 21 version but  only fix speed like 19 version...
Stats and Ranking Somewhere along the way the calculator got messed up. When I win the game my stats go down and the opponent's goes up 
Worst game Worst game ever played
Really slow ..... plzz nex update is fisht... record real harmonium voice... and attack this software H
Not loading fully I do like the game. However, the font is really small, the characters don't fully load they show up as white blocks, the store doesn't fully load as well its just a white. Can someone help on these problems
No, no, no. The tutorial is bad, the music makes me want cut my ears off, really crappy art and just on the cheap. Waste of money, refund pls.
Game seems to be good, however I am playing it on nexus 5 and I am unable to click on anything from the menu page. I checked the compatibility info and it says that it works fine with nexus 5. Can you guys solve this issue asap
Sorry i would give it no stars if i could IT WON'T EVEN INSTALL HOW CAN I PLAY AND I WASN'T EVEN GOING TO MENTION ITS ONLY A FREE DEMO NOT GAME. NOW I AM BECAUSE THIS IS STUPID.  YOU GET ZERO  STARS
Please fix It let's me play for 5 minutes and cut out. Please fix
Bulllllllshit The shit graphics and take lot time to start do hell with ur shit game... Dont download this shit....
No scorecard or ability to add Gps seemed to work well but even though it had the course it did not have the scorecard or even the ability to add it so it wasn't very useful for using during the round.
Don't down load it Its a boring game and the screen is so little that you can't even see what you're doing.
Paid app So I bought the game yet if I want to advance to the third season without having to complete the first two I need to pay again I changed phones, so I need to complete everything again What did I pay for if I still get ads
Connection Problem I can't ever play the game cause theirs a connection problem
Tweets take a long time to post Not sure why, whenever I use a WiFi connection, the tweets take a long time to post. The timeline gets refreshed at the same time.
EDIT BASE NEEDED  no one lesson to me...1 star
Not working Sent email havent heard back to why i am to repay for the app to work in a new car.
Bad Horrible
Can't log in UPDATE game won't let me log in for at least a week. Keep trying to log in andvevery time I tap the tap here to play screen, it generates a new start screen. Sorry to my league for not being able to log on. This sucks.
Don't work It don't work I only can tap one thing really DO NOT INSTALL THIS APP HATE THIS NONONONO DO NOT INSTALL
Don't download.   The game can't open. The first page is repeating and not open to play.
Ads Can't play one level without a add popping up before it starts or before it finishes. Rather play the fake CTR games and sacrifice the originality then play this. DON'T BOTHER GUYS, IT WON'T BE FUN.
Useless Useless game I have ever seen Just wastage of Internet Data And Time.
Months of waiting After months of playing, still no quest for stone. Maybe this is an option for paying customers I'm tired of logging in just to do the same thing everyday.
Well Son loves this game but once purchased it won't load. Please fix
Where is it
Horble it dose not even say anything when you pick up
Works ok. Not worth 6.99. Kids will loose races.. hard to win
Imprecisa Molto imprecisa...
Bad parts It's gay as he'll that you spend a g or more on parts and everything is soooo spendy so change that or give ppl more money and I will reinstall. Definitely uninstalling.
Have great GPS here but these offline don't do it for me
VERGOGNA Avete praticamente rubato il dominio del vostro sito al famoso progetto ibrido Phone e Tablet, appunto paranoidandroid . Pi volte ho sollecitato via e mail senza alcuna vostra risposta.
Not good It should have more games my niece gets bored even when she plays all of the games
No longer working My daughter used to love playing this game, but since my Samsung Galaxy tab S tablet has been updated to Lollipop, this app no longer works. It starts up, gets to the splash and then crashes....please fix
Fix the Android Lollipop Ever since I upgraded to Lollipop and the app is slow as hell, and the game freezes most of the time and I have to restart my phone... You guys really need to fix this.
Not fun In some Leal's you get stock and can't pass at all. It gets u angry. Don't install. Stooped game. Not fun and boring. Worse game ever fauvk the game. Not full version too. Fauck
Rubbish This is crap
WORSE GAME EVER HOW STUPID IS THIS GAME Hate it ever time I go on the app at always say there's an arror stupid I can't want to tell my lawyer and Sue
Ads and IAPs Full screen pop up ads right after starting app, and requests for in app payments on the main game selection screen. This is not suitable for children.
Horrible Slow. Horrible interfaces. Bus tracker is inefficient and slow. Nothing makes sense and it looks like crap. The only good this are the gautrain notifications.
Update crashed it Great game until this last update ... It did literally the opposite of what it said now it will not load at all. UPDATE.I am no longer able to press play or anything else. Uninstalled and re installed issue still there
Major glitch , incomplete Take a silver sled with a pocket rocket will not work for my galaxy 3 and many other phones please fix , can't complete star  Still doesn't work after update 
Ai reach is ridiculous The ai would be hitting me then I wouldn't be able to hit back at all this is my only problem with this game
.It isnt working anymore The game is awesome but there seems to be some problem with it seeing as it opens fine but when i choose the stage it closes. Fix this.
Its notbworking It used to work 5 stars all of the sudden i get the msg unfortuanatly dominoes stpped working, uninstalled an installed again still the same msg, pls fix it 
Yet another Marvell game that doesn't work Force close before I can get into the app. Android One M8. Would love to play it though
How do I park
Adams Always no space 
Too many adds I like the game, but can't stand all the video adds that use massive amounts of data. Can't turn it to airplane mode because I need access for work. Remove some adds and I'll 're install the game. For now, I'm uninstalling.
Levels not loading properly Level F14 feather stages doesn't actually load the 4th pig, making it so I can NEVER get 3 stars on that particular level. Please fix
I hate it If i can give 0 star for this i will. I open it and it will close by it self
Charged Twice My account statement says I was charged twice for this app. Its great, and will give 5 stars once my issue is resolved.
Worst service Booked 2 rides 10hrs in advance. Not even a single cab came. Got the driver contact details for the ride but at the last moment they said the cab is break down. If u completely depend on this cab u will be in trouble....
Problem installing Issues with kitkat and restrictions using SD card to install. Please update
It's fun but costs money to win big battles. The prices start out low for beginners and gets even more expensive the higher you get.
Do not download
Machete It wasted my time cant get anymore machetes to continue the game unless spend real cash... nah its all money money money... cant just enjoy a normal game
Crap Odds off winning are 41 percent with this strategy don't waste the time or money.
What is this this game is good but we only have thomas.we can not buy any other train,they always ask money for it.fix it than 5 stars
I liked the original I've always loved the game snake. Its one of my favorites. But I'm deleting this game because the controls are too difficult and at least for me they don't work properly.
scam i paid for the app  but now when i open it stated unlicensed n force close. what is this u tell me totally unreliable
No help section for the moves or rules.didn't know how to play
Widget Bought the widget, and it never loaded up on my phone. Then I uninstalled the widget, and waited a few days reloaded agn, and it still doesn't load. The app works fine. Please fix the widget.
Okay Well um it's a really good game but every time you play with a computer they always cheat so when its there turn the always give them free turns and not me that's why I loss and the ads are really making me mad so plz fix all of it
The game is great but it won't let me sign in next day to play all I get is toy blast has stopped working once I send a report in it lets me play but next time I can't play again
Is me paehle jaisa nahi he . ihated it
Don't work  for distance more than 100 kms .
Okay The game is good but the update system is horrible. I upgrade the bike and if I was to select, select a bike all of my upgrades are gone and the game money is gone.
Very poor app. Crikey, for the quantity and quality of the app it should be free. Buggr all content,  Buggr all towns, Buggr all depth anywhere actually. This weeks forecasts for my city goes M, T, W, Th, S, Su Ummm DOH what happened to Friday
Even one sound don't matches
Shit of a game Wastage of time and data
Disliked it It is a good game but the speed of coin moving is too slow  only by that reason I gave only one star
Ok but The game has some pictures that unless you play alot of old games your not going to pass without the worthless coins. And im talking about level 21. Also can someone tell me plez and thx
Blegh Good game, but requires constant internet, so no play on the go for some 
Love lacrosse I love lacrosse but this game is horrible not worth the money I paid. I hope the console game is better because you can't win I threw my phone in the first game it's so bad
Now the game is to big After the last update the game is to big for my phone and I can not adjust size so I can play please fix this problem thank you
Few bugs. Should be more accessible and balanced for casual players. Few bugs. Should be more accessible and balanced for casual players.
Seriously flawed My daughter is 5 and she said it was boring And there are ads all the time, even if you press the back button the same ad plays over again and again.
jickon nath
Keep to free one Licence check failed I'm glad I paid for something I can't use
Still waiting for those big changes The dev keeps saying big changes coming but all we get is force closes.
Hate this game Because it kicks you. Out of the game
Update is not working Since i upgraded the app is not working at all. It just freezes. Fix this please or put it back to the way it was before.
Boring. Do not installed this app. It takes long time to start.
Not good Why do I  need a premium subscription if it is free on ios
Worst game ever There was nothing to do in the game. There was 1 ugly girl to use, a few objects that were hideous and you had to pay for all the good stuff. So just to be clear , this is the worst game ever 
Des crotte des cochon N'est pas disponible dans tous les pays
Porn Loved it until a pornographic ad popped up, then anothet...no thanks. Uninstalling. Thank God my kid wasn't using this seemingly family friendly app.
Doesn't work The home screen just loads continuously.
Bakwas hai
It has already started glitching
Doesn't even start Just flashes powered by unity over and over again
Not liking it The game wouldnt load enough for me to even make an account or let me sogn os a giest. Mind you this is first time playing the game
payment does not work.. paygate  not active
Watse kak is die
DOnt bother I want me money back
My sweet baby girl A very nice game
Grrr, usually great but... Updated phone and lost all progress... Please help
Does not work in my Galaxy s5 I have installed on my kit Kat 4.4.2 version but does not work It give me massage that update the new version. So I am trying to update the new version but can't I have used this application b4 It was good
Didnt earn my xoins I just played the best hole of my life. 40 foot putt and all. Leveled up twice on one hole. Should of won like 300 coins or something.....and then noticed i didnt get any of them. Not happy. Player name is MilkySwagger
Blurry pics on galaxy s4 I just can't get this app to focus.. The native camera app on my s4 is fast better.
it sucks what the fuck is this app it crashed and stopped when i opened it. DON'T WASTE YOUR TIME
wrong its daft, you gentle tap your ball and it say foul like a stuborn five year old.
Kooky. Looks great, but no substance, nothing works properly. Considering the money surfing is generating, a half assed, glitchy app is unacceptable, lucky for FOXTEL.  Lame effort, I'm going surfing instead.
Can't open it The app will not open. Can't play it. Will update if issue is fixed
Doesn't work want refund
Sucks It wouldn't let me turn it would only let me go left and I wasn't even controlling it
Tumhari MAA KI CHUT, yeh kya chutiyapaa lga rakha hai Dont install, such a waste of time
Can't open app since upgrading my phone Used to have Samsung Galaxy Note 2 and it worked fine. Now I have a Samsung Galaxy S6 and the app won't even open.
No, just no. Don't like it. Tediously boring. Give me back my money.
Doesn't save or print I paid for the special pictures and it neither saves them to the camera roll nor prints to my printer. DO NOT PAY FOR THE PICTURES. another poor port from Apple to Android. Very disappointed.
Is usless The car doesn't want to move
What the Last update, all it would show is a black screen..... This update, it starts up with a black screen and a message that says can't play video Please fix this issue
Add Maharashtra vehicle info too
Lost all progress Played for a couple weeks then today I opened the game to find all progress lost and I'm back to the stone age with no buildings or territory. Uninstalled it immediately. What a waste of time.
Not liking much Try to sync it with other apps ie Facebook and it says can not complete action not happy Please fix I have a samsung galaxy s3.
What to do What we have to do when they get married in church and the girl touches the rose please reply within 5 days other wise il uninstall this app and there should not be bug fixes
Very poor game..
Nickelodeon commercial issue Please fix Nickelodeon commercial hanging up, won't skip, or finish. Only fix is to Force Stop. 
Sick game I loved it it does fix viruses trust me
Waste of time and money Won't even work When I pushed refund, it said couldn't complete refund Don't waste ur time on this people U can get it free on a computer FREE
Too many ads Ridiculous amount of ads to close before you even begin to play...
Doesn't work Did not even let create an account
Dreadful waste of 2 pounds Frustratingly difficult. Most of the time the game simply doesn't provide you with the tools you need to defeat the current enemy, and tiles are mostly scattered uselessly across the board.  Not that much fun.
I don't like this newer version at all. The power ups don't work like they used to. The freeze power up turns itself on before I want to use it. I want the old version back Newer version
No Moga support Unlike Sega's other titles, the Moga controller isn't supported in this game so gets 2 out of 5.  You'll get a 5 star review once you add Moga controller support.
Was good once upon a time. Was going great loved the game. But one I got so far the game stops. It says unfortunately it quit working. Then it made me restart the game, so I gave it another shot. And.... it stops working again Please fix.
It sucks I hate this game you start off with nothing and you have to beat the hatdest guys in the game while you have the weakest so i say it sucks 
Borring I completed it in less than an hour and you could drive through the cars.
The video to lure you in showed 3rd person battles. But the actual game fell woefully short. Not my cup of tea these types of game.
alerts disappear why alerts disappear instantly i want to read it again but then they are removed so we cant check again any dealys ..
Doesn't work Doesn't even open on my Nexus 6. Emailed developers and got no response.
Good game, but ridiculous overpriced in game content This game is pretty good,  but it's ridiculous how overpriced an extra hero can be, costing upwards of 15 and it's  just a little hero and no extra content.
King of zombie Not so fun dis game..jus for kid level..my level is so far from dis level..please improve your game make more higher level like me have fun with dis game.not just simple make money k,dont be selfish person..
Bad Just so bad
Won't even let me play The screen freezes on the first search and won't let me push anything. Would be a great game if fixed.
No goals This app was what I thought I wanted , but no way to make goals . Pointless for me , back SHealth I guess . Don't buy this if you want to easily make goals .
Still the biggest donkey site I've been on If you like donkey poker, this is your site
Crashes to easy.,, What happened to them awesome Racing Games on android, lately its as if a 5yr old has learnt coding  is practicing on here, if this carrys on am sacking android  moving to IOS
No 12hr click display Why do all these widgets display in 24hr format even when the system is set for 12hr display Please fix
worked fine until latest update i love this game and own the board game as well as the android version. since the latest update, the tablet version is unplayable, the screen just flickers and dies. please fix
App is not working I've been approved to drive yet the app will not let me log in. I can log into the rider app just fine. Why not this one
Force close Would give a higher rating if the game wouldn't force close every time I open it. Can't even get past the first logo
Bootloop It keeps restarting itself over and over in every 5 seconds. Horrible
Ads are obnoxious I played this all week and loved it Today these obnoxious ads with annoying music started popping up when I finish a game. Most annoying ads I ever had on an app. Uninstalling....
Cheats Cute game, but something about when I reached a certain level, I couldn't get through it without power ups,.and even that didn't help  Done.
Won't go past test protocol 3 nothing happens Cant get any info on car at all as won't connect
Not like the site at all My favorite game to play on Sporcle is the trivia bingo, and either I just cannot find it for the life of me or it just isn't included. Bingo was the only reason I purchased this app.
Not working Always saying waiting for reliable signal,till now it doesn't show speed
This is the worst This thing always loads and it never hurrys up
Too many ads close to the game Dont want ads sitting ontop of game. Distracting. Deleted
Was a good game up until this new update. Now its keepa telling me to check my connection everytime i hit play so now this is a useless app
Great Looks like traditional Lar in all her awesomeness Latest update broke the game. Crashes on startup loading screen Samsung Note 2   Awesome game Looks great so far.  Love the wall run and parkour moves 
C'est triste parce que je voulais regarder des missions de tlvision franais, que je manque, mais apparemment je ne puisse pas regarder en angleterre.                           C'est dommage. . .
Special actions buggy on last turn Love the game but a bug disables special actions on your last turn. This needs to be corrected as it can ruin a game.
Not opening
I have downloaded 2 of your fireman sam games and both do not. Why is this happening not happy after paying for the second 1
Awfully boring
Terribly innacurate From Sydney AU. Thoroughly tested this always inaccurate, even with multiple satellite connections. Not sure if this is the nature of these kind of apps, though comparing this to my vehicles speed it was terribly unreliable
Loved it It is a good game but it has the same picture in my other game
app not working app not working into my device  neken n8
Doesn't work No matter what menu item is selected, all I see is the loading spinner.
Dissatisfied Why when I select gallery does it not show all the pictures stored on my device This would be a needed requirement for a photo app wouldn't it How about fixing that since I did pay to use the app
Bullshit app I wana give negative rating...it won't work and flooded with ads only...Dont download such shit....
Fake app doesn't support nor show the road or tell exactly where we are it's fake I don't even like to gve one star but if I don't give their no way to give the feedback friends pls dnt download
Loading It's telling me connection error. And i have to proceed but then it has to load again like fix this and there's non wrong we got connection
              ...  
Can't Load Game I have uninstalled and reinstalled this game 4 times. I have full Internet connection.  Have a Samsung tablet please fix bug.
Perfect
Payment failed Tried purchasing it a few times but keeps timing out.
Cant get on I have uninstalled it plenty of times and it still wont let me get on to play, bs, I will install iy again after a few days of it not being on my phone
Ads way to many Even when you turn off WiFi it still does it waste of space and time also to leafy
Not fully functional yet Will rate 5 stars when reads more than p codes and bi directional controls are there bi directional controls is the ability to control actuators
I have just purchased and install but get error can't mount and su not good done
Too revealing to be rated E Ridiculous that I have to see half of the women's breasts every time I open a case. My kids wanted to play this, glad I did not hand them my phone.
Its good but I cant open if you fix that I rate 5 stars
I hate it It Sucks I will not be playing it again
reverse the update the update is terrible, the white screen matches the website, but the black was easier to see, better for the eyes. loved the app before. now, not so much
Coco   marine     is   of   love  and     kissing     go  in   play   store   and   Don t     writt  any   thing   see  it  on   play  store    apps
Update lost all my progress again .  Why can't you guys figure this out So annoying
So mad I paid for it and installed but now it won't download cause it says I have insufficient memory which is a crock
Dont know how to play........come on Payed for this.......if I cant play, would appreciate my money back....stupid game, don't give you're money to this dumb game
Good game but sucks  The graphics are stunning. Gameplay is awesome. The only thing thats really anoyying is how the app constantly freezes that it doesnt even allow you to play it troughly
Turma da Galinha Tambm adquiri os 3 anteriores, em portugus, comprados e foram substitudos por esse em ingls com uma msica. Espero que o erro seja corrigido o quanto antes.
Search location having problem. Totally out. Local country but comes out world map. Data wrong, search Universiti Putra, becomes Universiti Malaya location. Can make a person unfamiliar get lost. Data integrity source
Latest Update is Terrible Game will not load every time on galaxy s6 edge. Getting real hard to enjoy a game that I can't even play. And I've uninstalled and reinstalled 3 times already
I cant open my village anymore,a message appear Unfortunately,ice village stopped,please fix it for me,i am level 39 my village name Douce Village,i don't want to lose my village,its so hard to level up..hoping for your kind consideration..thanks..
Ok Sound work s but music does not to glitchy. It use to work
This app blows Second party search engine. Stick to the internet it is free. Plus this app does not support IP boards.  Wasted my time and money. How do I get a refund
If there was no stars i would pick that. This app is slow, and makes notes impossible to use. Its the worse i app  ive ever used. Coming from a 12 year old
SUCKS After the update it won't open. Automatically goes to app store.
Boooooooooring n fake.... actually I saw everyones reviews for this app...guys dnt take it serious its just a prank
Too hard too quick Stupidly hard very quickly. The easy junior version of this game is stupidly easy....no middle ground here. Annoying. Had a few months, fed up with it, uninstalling. Theres only a few levels of challenging fun.
PAYOUTS ARE NOT WHAT THEY INTEND... I've noticed that when I hit a certain amount, it doesn't payout the correct amount.  That's no fun
I just purchased the full version everytime I hit the home button it tells me 24 hour trial period will end. And I have to click the Open button every time to go home what is up with this
Please fix Unfortunitely stop working po ang lumalabas ,ayaw gumana
Direction I would award it full stars if i was able to hover above the arrows showing the wavewindswell direction to see the exact degrees
Doesnt wprk Never works correctly. Even when climbing onto a bus it never shows true location. As useful as every other crap service in RSA. Thanks for taking up my data.....POS.
Fun game but doesn't save progress I worked so hard to create an awesome world but I had to leave the game and 5 MINUTES LATER EVERYTHING WAS GONE. but still a fun game
Confusing categories Some artists don't really belong to one hit wonders.
Sucks Waste of my time and money. I used to play this game back when I was younger on my ps3. When this came out, I thought I would like it like when I was a kid. Now I can't just get the same vibe out of it.
Accuracy Accuracy has fallen through the floor in the last few years. Useless for anything but the weather radar.
Fix The doc station needs to be translucent. It's white.
Used to be a good game. Now it lags on some of the fastest wifis out there. Used to be a decent game and would have said it to be a 6 star. That was 2 months ago and now i can barly play it because of the lag.
No save level option Cant continue playing the first level each time I start the game when there are 100  levels.
This sucks It won't work when I go to put my scoop in it closes out
Won't work with Chromecast Press releases online say it now works with Chromecast.  No dice for me but all other apps cast perfectly.  What gives Sling  15 for false promises  I understand the pressure to roll put support but it'd best be ready
Bad Is baddddddd
If I could rate no stars I would. No instructions
Sucks This game sucks there are no instructions whatsoever
Paid app Crap.  Will not work.   Would be 0 starts if possible.   I paid for this crap   Used to be awesome.  My wife has exact same problems.  E  mailed several weeks ago for tech support,  but no response.   Poor
Horiable It takes up to much of my devices storage.
Stuck Game forcing me to BUY chip Can't sleep to get my rent owed, cant play poker out of chips.....
The app does not work. Cannot detect my tv. Waste of money and time.  Where is the zero rating
One thing We need skins
Cloud back up no longer working Will not back up to Box or Google Drive.  I have removed cloud accounts and reset up.  Also tried different accounts.  Will still will not move past Enumerating backup files.  Stuck at 0.
9apps includes low quality third party apps. It also not give credits to me on mcent recently.
You need to pay to have fun
Awesome me Well since I on Facebook,I would like to get more friend in whole country especially USA. I really love USA so much
What the he'll The pic shows a light coming from what looks like the camera on the phone. It is false advertising. This app sucks big prunes. Yuck yuck yuck.
How to play multiplayer with friends There is no service of playing multiplying
Oh no I cannot install it because it didnt work on my device  
Doubt If i know to read hindi y i gona use this app i want learn how to read n speak
West game time and mb west
Love it, hate it I love the game the graphics are good and you can waste alot of them having fun but I'm seriously sick of the pop up ads that take me out of the game not to mention the x is so small often I hit the ad trying to remove it
Right analog spoils the whole experience The right analog stick is not working. Can't look around. Why on earth would I keep on buying modern combat games
My set disappears after creation And nothing appear even after reboot. Major disappointment
Not thrilled I have used this PREMIUM app for a few years now and 2x now the app updates and ERASES ALL MY INFO... then when I click restore data.. there was nothing to restore, yet I have backed up my history..
NOT SO HAPPY EVEN IF IM NOT A VIP SUBSCRIBER It freezes insted i get the 7 day song of coca cola i dont get it because of that bug get my song back and i will change my comment
No Mazha nahi hai
Stick texting Needs update
This is poor and u guys are fibbers it looks ntn like the pic u have on the front
Flow conversions lacking Not enough conversions.  I don't find any way to add industry specific units.
Money back plzz First episode doesnt work so no point plzz refund me i really want it to work thow it looks pretty cool from the pics
Cant play it Can't turn off the vibration. Calibration is off
I loved the game until I had to get a new phone and download the app again and sign in only to find out I lost everything and had to start at level 1 grrrr. All my other games save
Why o why I can't play I wanted to play this game but wat happen Still patch 066 I've done it and then its automatically close. Then I started again 035 same they close the app Please help me guys a wanna play kritika
good but not working any more good game, payed for it. But now it crashes at launch, every time. Have uninstalledinstalled several times. Asus MeMopad FHD 10
D'not work pusiyan gulf,kuwit area.very bad app.give me my many..fu.you...
prize claw like a bit better this time. see how i get on and will review my stars.  one star less on level 27 closed the game as ran out of grabs now im back on level 1.......disappointed.
Adrianna Callahan is mad I can't even get the other things unless I buy them on my phone
Didn't even let me choose a team
It not work on SS Note 3 Hi team,  it stop when my Note 3 turn to Stand by mode. It work well if the screen still on. Please help me. This soft work perfectly on other phone as HTC One. But unluckily, it not work well on Note3.
Horrible Purchased game for 6.99 and app does not work or open.  Played only once after 45 minutes of download time with wifi.
Still doesn't work...when i open the app,it opens and than where the live score should be its loading forever and doesn't shows score,even if i restart the app,same thing happens
LG G3 Issues Great game but the item screen doesn't work on the LG g3.   Somehow made it to almost the end of the game... Can't equip the armor and can't use the items cause I can't access the menus.  Fix please
Won't load... Shuts down right after it loads.   Keeps on saying Angry Birds is not responding.   I'm upset because it was working fine yesterday
samsung e5 i hate this game
Out 2 My daughter loves this game but I definitely don't think its worth 1.99. The same things over and over and you can't choose which games to play just whatever comes up. I'm disappointed to say the least.
Fail It was fun at first, then it got super easy that even my 4 yr old had no trouble answering them.
Dipdap winter Does not work ,it freezes.my son was so disappointed,I asked for a refund and never got one,really annoyed and disappointed.
What happened to root keeper for ota Bought pro for this but don't see it in the settings anymore. Am I missing something Will edit to five star if it is still there
Too short Way too short. Needs more to do. Still no updates in months. Not worth the money.
Lack of odd . What happed
Booo Don't get
Poor
Really... All of your games look awesome and all but when you download a game and wait for the load screen too pass by then nothing for 10 mins nothing but all black screen it is really inconvenient 
Ok but not so good Adds come in every round and it disturbs us
. Handling is horrid.. If you turn to quickly it doesn't register.. And feels like you are steering a cow .. PC version is great.. But this is utter rubbish.
Don't bother to load You have got to be kidding This is a joke.
Update increased drift The latest update has increased the drift rendering this app unsuable now. The whole screen spins a whole 360 degrees within 20 seconds .Please fix. Note 4 user
ADS IN A PAID GAME I get 30 second ads when I start the game which are unsuitable, constant begging to connect my Facebook, banner ads... This is ridiculous for a game that I paid for Stay away
Doesn't work I have tried to play this many times since i bought it and all it does is crash no matter what i try. not worth the money
Not everyone likes facebook 5 stars if you give another way to log in like email or g or Twitter or something else.
Performance issues For about the first five levels it was fine, but after that it started to crash and freeze my brand new tablet... So fix it or uninstall
Dose nothing It legitimate does nothing but load google map or you can pay money for other programs
Ehh The graphics are dissapointingly low resolution, you can't touch and drag to aim, and there is no clear top to the level. The balls are just attached to an invisible roof. Not really interested in playing it any more.
Useless game.... don't even wanna waste time to play it guyz
Paid and no game. Paid for full edition today and it can't download because of a error  Not bloddy happy
Fun when it works. Probably one of he best mobile games out there right now   and RTS period,  but it just can't seem to play for more than 2 minutes without needing to crash. A shame,  I was really liking this game.
0MG takes Forever to install D  Dumb Does Not load Moon Reader  is better
Bosan Boleh tak lain kali main game ne tk pyh nak beli pakai point..cuma pakai duit jer..tak enjoy lah main kalau macam ini.
WHAT I used to love it on my iPod... But now its says device not supported so now I lost 4. On my LG g pad 7.0
Ok what's up What up I had a pair over a high card like come on
I love Lego games, they are my favorite type of game. But this one will not even play. It keeps stopping, I can not even get to play screen before it stops.
Lame lame lame lame lame Crappy
Really My partner will not only throw off on a trick when he's the last to play encode trump,  but called a loner with 3 trump and no bowers. Can't you fix these glitches If you like this version try tricksters,  you'll love it
Crashes Never loads up. Always stops. Had to uninstall. LG G3 mobile.
The different games are great but they don't let you  win enough if I wanted to spend a bunch of money on a slot games I would go to the casino were at least I could win back not just give it away this game is fun but you can't have your wins long
Black Screen Would really like to play this game but it usually loads to a black screen. Managed to watch the shadowy spider guy eat up all the bright plant buds but then it went to black again. Please fix, this game looks like it would be fun.
I like drum Me too
Don't waist your time It is very bad app.
Its good but the controls disappear sometimes and its frustating
Why do u need Device IDcaller Info App has been great, but don't ask for more permissions without telling us why u need them. Please respect your customers privacy
Glitches on my android devices where I lose scores and games. This happens daily so I'm not sure if this is just on android. If it keeps happening, I will have to delete it. Othrt than that it is a great game.
Pages are not loaded well Unlimited membership for two months, some pages are not coming up, there's wrong issue also.
I already purchased but keep on pop 30 sec stuff. When press skip. It appear  you already own this item then nth happen . It still need to wait.
loved it now I hate it it was a great game but know it glitches every time I open app it kicks me back out fix it please or it stays 1 star
Make it as I made a mistake when I am not Seriously I really think they make you loose sometime so you can buy the way up.. I am no where close to getting it wrong and fails me for no reason. So angry. It has done it several times now
It won't let me jump or attak.
very nice
Doesn't work Freezes on the selection screen.
Cant watch streams It lets the advertisements load but all the streams i tried wont even load. All i can see is a black screen. The chat is working and if its audio mode only. Pls fix
I hate it Don't waste you're time it is horrible
Disk digger pro Waste of money  Would not work on LG3.
Please Can I get a refund
Didn't work
HELP How do I see when my fans are online and who they are watching
This app is curpt. This app is not proper working
The cars need to stop when u are turning left for the second time after u pick up the parent
My hot bar is only 5 please make 10. It crashed and I lost 20 chest worth of stuff
I hate that I can't add comics from my sd card.   Until this is fixed it's a 1 star rating
The app only caters for ID numbers only and not passport numbers. Please improve on this otherwise looks like a very handy app
Error error error error error How about actually fixing the error problem. It was cool till it kept showing the error crap. So instead of just saying you fixed it when you didnt, you should actually fix it. Like now.
Frell The video button still doesnt work. Moreover, the update a month or two ago erased all gold coins I had. That was around 400 for a new top weapon. I am furious
Love it but..... I love this game, but it likes to restart my game at random times its really frustrating when you get really far and it starts over.
What a foolI hated it Who are the fools to make this type of game. I suggest please don't waste ur time by installing this game
There must be a better game This piece of excrement tries to make moves for you, most of which are stupid, and as mentioned by others the flashing ads are what I call a PITA. Try some other game and save yourself the hassle.
No search option Difficult to find the area and when i click on setting the setting not b appear  please solved my this problem then i will give 5 star otherwise m confuse to find please help me.
Mic problems Seems like the LIKE button is screwed up. When I broadcast, the likes keep going up, even when no one's in the room. Fix this
Messed up savegame Oi No matter what I do, cloud save gets downloaded, then I start with 40k and 0 progress... Wanted to make a clean save even though it's unbelievably expensive, and what do I get Very disappointed.
Performance Why is performance a part of this package..as you can see in your pics for this product... but try and use it and you want me to download and try free With ads
Ok but copyright issue Ok game but they stole the texture from trin sim 3583 bytes
I tested it again. Try this Go and stand at a Gautrain bus station. Wait until you see any Gautrain bus and check the location on the app. Not close.
I can't get in I can't pick a nickname I will put crazy names like wierd and it says some body has this name I even put chair and it said someone had the name who ever has that name is crazy I wanted to give it 0 stars but I wanted to comment
Stuck Game seems really fun. But.... My game wont let me choose skill when the tutorial asks me to.power up skills. So i get stuck and have to get off the game and reatart it.
I could,not make it work.it only pick one camera or how it work
HOW DO YOU COMPLETE LOVE IS IN THE AIR QUEST I try to make my sims fall in love but they just won't
It is just not working with Lollipop.
Can't verify license Probably last time I buy from app store.  Can't even play the game.  Waste of a dollar.  How do I get a refund
It's good if you don't need to Palm mute or like to play drone notes. It is okay if you are looking to play drone notes but you can't Palm mute for just short notes
useless Don't  ever  download  it. ..The most useless  or rather I should say the most senseless  app. ....
I just download I can't believe it I just paid for this and we can't play it as licence not validated I want  a refund  not happy
Game crashes while loading after update I love the game. But this last update has messed it up. While loading the game it crashes at about the 25 point. Samsung GS3 please fix
What a piece of garbage. Constant freezing, and dropping connections. Every other video streaming service works fine, but this one fails miserably.
Lags and crashes This game would be fun if it didn't crash every minute.  Please fix bugs.  I paid for this game and it really let me down.
Bad Bad no animation
This was cheap, yes. But also close to worthless Might be ok if you live in Florida, otherwise there are better alternatives.
Don't understand the concept What am I suppose to do so many bugs needs to be fixed
Give me an email Email received, Birmingham has been added Well done guys
Black screen Every time I tried going to one place it sends me back to the play store
Spider solitaire No training on how to play
Doesn't deserve 4 stars I was suckered into buying just to try, and it's disappointing. It's like candy crush for dudes or something. It's only saving grace is no permissions. Save your money.
Open It is nice it can make u turn into a movie start
Hate it alot It is the most horrible game on EARTH It's too bad for you and me
Login fail This app keeps telling me my login credentials are wrong, which it is not, removing from my fone as of now.
I've brought some planes and airports.  After the update.  It's all gone and wants me to pay  2.99 again. ... unhappy Beware of any purchases on here
Cheat I hear back ground music, a house, and moving white boxes. Clueless what to do.
Disgusting app
A great  game  but Since  I downloaded  it again every time  I finish  a match  there's a server  error  and I lose the match  and mi coins  please  fix it
Gave me Malware It was an okay app until it gave me malware. Thanks for that... I'll find another app that ISN'T a virus.
Worst game Game will take your coins even you email them they do not respond to you would not recommend the game.
No the best You can't buy a lot of stuff all the things are locked and you have to pay for them
very good service campass
Wtf Paid for full version and extras still shows as locked
Notes always same length This is terrible. The notes always fade really slowly, and don't play for longer when you hold down a key.
Problem Game looks like a lot of fun but says striving to do our best and won't let me play. What tha heck man I just wanna play some baseball on my phone is that to much to ask
Crap ESPN sellouts Why do they keep referring to Bruce Jenner as she come on Really ESPN really jacked up that award. You guys prefer cheap ratings over real honorably people that deserve the award. You guys can Suck it like Bruce Jenner now does.
Cutting score won't upload. Please fix this.
Wtf sucks dick Come on guy dont hate it kill it
Wrong app 4 me I guess Not smart enough 2 figure out how 2 get songs so I could play them. I was just expecting something different
Why its not connecting through data networks I couldnt connect through data connectivity for past two days....plz advise...
No support, crashing Mika Mobile have abandon android, do not buy unless you want to throw away your money. Their products should be taken off the market because of this.
Bullshit Fix the import before I ree buy I have over 120 elements on free version and the premium version won't import
Awful. Doesn't sound like a piano at all. Really bad sound. I have heard a REAL piano before and it sounds nothing like this. Don't waste your time with this app.
Very junk now Bought it thinking itll be great. Used it for a while then now its not working. Wont allow me too unfollow people thats not following me back. Who else has this problem
Need to unlock more trains... Me nephews love dis game.... but ders nly 1 train... so dey ask for more trains... plz try to fix dis issue as soon as possible
Crap I play it on my PC but when I click the icon on my tablet, it flashes for a second and goes back to the icons.  Sucks  I would be playing if it worked on my kobo.  Can't you fix it
Do not buy this app... If you have a Garmin Heart Rate Monitor. It won't detect your HRM. A waste of money
DOESN'T WORK This does not work, it needs to be fixed.  We downloaded it for our 7 year old granddaughter and cant get past the main screen. Please fix
Love it It help you for girlfriends and boyfriends
Boring Not worth the money. Repetitive and dull. About 2 minutes of game repeated over and over.
Suggestion and rectification Plz provide option for group msg  signature insert. And for Samsung Grand 2 list of suggested contact getting hided under my keypad so can't see and can't select them all so plz correct this bug
Bible version, versus are missing Why are some bible versus missing. Almost on every version English and Spanish. What's going on Glad I still have a bible I could go to. Please can you fix this or a is permanent things so I could deleted the app.
If the shadows were to be adjusted to where you need to have a million torches to still be in the dark I'd rate higher.
Terrible Fantastic content but horrible app. Very slow and unreliable. Better off downloading podcasts from elsewhere
USELESS IN SA The app is absolutely useless in South Africa.
Error messages Couldn't install, despite Wifi connection. Error messages. Tried to get a refund...guess what error messages. Not impressed
Won't log in Even after quadruple checking the username password combination was correct.
Disgusts me.. How I paid for this app, and when I post to facebook, this app puts an advertising link in the memory of my phone. This is the PAID version. Tacky as hell.
Hated it This is so not funny It never made me laugh once. Invited twenty friends over that can laugh VERY easily but no one even smiled..... it deserves 0 stars
Star walk vs S6Edge Great app if it would work right after Android updated the app stays upside down....words and stars
Crappest app ever If there was an option for 0 stars, this would have it. It should also be free...
Notification error I recently upgraded to a galaxy s6 sprint and when playing online, I don't receive notifications, when its my turn, like I did on my old galaxy s4
N funciona no LG L90
Nope I've tried this game 3 times over the  Iast 6 months. I can't do it. The game has so much lag I can't enjoy it. I really want to like this game, my buddies all play it, but it's just not going to happen. Please fix it.
Greed A paid game should not have in app purchases or ads.
Performance has gone down It was amazing when I started playing. Used to hang a little. But was manageable. Now I can't even get to the game. It would start to load and app just exits.
I Come on guys I expected better but you should add a player customization in here
Crap You can't win unless you buy crap and when it says you've unlocked somthing. You haven't. I DEMAND A REFUND. NOW.
Terrible IT DOESN'T WANT TO PLAY AT ALL AND I HAD TO DOWNLOAD GOOGLE PLAY GAMES FOR NOTHING.......
A confidence trick It worked long enough to pay for the extra pets now it no longer opens. Mr Disney, you are a crook.
Crap Spent ages with this game and the update has deleted my information and contrary  to what the app says I can't recover my account don't have that option anywhere
Shake to change provider gets me stuck forever my gyro is broken. Loved this app before but after this last update it has become useless. Personaly I don't likeuse shake to.... features anyhow
Totally bad
Disappointed The game is almost the same as fmh 14. The match speed is so slow. Very disappointing.
saya suka saya suak suka
Why buy the paid version Why am I getting ads in an app that I paid for Maybe all of the buyers who feel cheated by having ads should get together for a class action lawsuit.
Doesn't open I haven't been able to open it for 3 days now
Bekar h mere facebook add krne wale paise chle gye aur app download price much ni mila
Advertising blocks top half of table so you can't even see where your shooting  Just trying to force you to pay for the upgrade
Repeated words Same words that keep repeating. Gets boring quick. Elementary level.
Very frustrated I used to play and loved it, I recently downloaded again and I am getting the loading screen, but a dialog box pops up with the following.. Marmalade v6.0.6 323198 Then the game freezes
Like the game, but WAY to many pop up ads, they pop up so quickly, that before you know it you have already tapped and opened the ad
Love it and Hate it App force crashes when opened up. I'm very dissapointed that I finally spent the money to buy it and it doesn't work at all...galaxy note 3...I loved it before so fix it please or refund my money.
Slow clunky, too american This is a really bad version of the Thup monkey games. Poorly executed and glacially slow. Horrendous americanisms good job etc. Wish I could get a refund.
F...ked up wit the new update Download some f.....kin,bulls...t apps wen connected to mobile network r Wifi  asks us to install....Hated it after update
It's ok. AI just runs you over The AI is so aggressive all the time it ruins it. They have to idea where the user is and will just barrel over you even on the starts.
Wheel of Fun It's not fun it's lazy
Needs Android 4.3 With the latest update, Android 4.3 or higher is needed, which is not available for the Samsung Galaxy S4 Mini in South Africa. As a result, I can no longer use the app. Epic fail, Discovery Insure.
Game deletion So, I loved this game. Yet, it failed me. The engine crashed on my phone, and forced a reinstall. Upon reinstalling.. All saved data was deleted. Royally irritating me
Doesn't Work
Different.... I am not happy. I used to be able to do anything on the people's teeth and you could pick the people. I remember this app and I used to love it... Now it's the stupidest game I have ever played... I'm very disappointed.
Pain in the train The app keeps opening, repeatedly, when it's fully closed and I'm not using it. I only use my oyster card about once every 3 months so the almost daily, multiple self opening is a real pain
Only one train My son loves this game, however it only let's you play as one train and is hard to navigate.
The new update I can't read anymore manga. I feel like I'm going to Uninstall this app and get another one. Waste of my time
More machetes We need more machetes to get ahead. Now we get 1 machete per level. And why do we have to install stupid apps to earn more Why can't we just watch videos to earn them
Waste of money Didn't do any more good than the free one. And constantly stops at 23.08
Last update The last update makes the game impossible to play. The text is way to big for the phone and can't see to play
Poor Do not get this game if u have a samsung galaxy ace it crashes on startup and wont give me a refund
A two year old could answer these. These questions are WAY to easy. A two year old could almost answer most of them.
Lag and always dc Crash and cant open this game.. spend a lot money useles
Doesn't count finger taps It says that I didn't tap the tile and makes me miss the song and my mom can play just fine. Its a fun game though
Don't get the jump button
If you're gonna have a free game you shouldn't have to buy some activities.
Bible app Too many adds popping up
Seriously Ok,at first it worked but the second time it didn't work 
It does not let me play the game
Go make coffee while waiting to collect winnings Downloaded the game, first spin I hit jackpot and have to wait nearly 2 minutes to collect my winnings. Second spin, another big win, another long wait. Sorry, not for me  uninstalled.
   

Bakwass game kene bakwas game hai
Refund me or sort out the game Can not finish a race throws me off every time and resets taking the mic sort it out plz
WON'T DOWNLOAD ERROR 907, 963 I have the HTC One M8 and I purchased the game but it will not download and install. I get Error 907 or 963 every time. please help
Used to be fun Used to be a lot of fun, now there's too many adds and it takes forever to get chips. I have to wait 3 hours to play 4 hands of black jack what is that crap. They really went after the money... It's a shame...
Not at all funny You know  creator don't  waste time in such things
Its alright Its alright because you can't call no one with out credits but u still can text. My next statement is better ringtones
It's pure shit If there would be a option of giving 0 i would have been given it .All the people reading plz dont download it....
Won't even load up V v v disappointing, wouldn't even load up on my Note 4
Not working at all I have a 2013 model LG42ln5400 and it does not connect. Waste of money.
Fun but flawed I can only get a decent score with a slow race penalty. Good game mechanics but this kinda kills it... Drifting isn't about lap times, its about style, technique, and how close you can get to the wall.
Boring game It would be better if it was an actual fighting game which is tekken known for
Error I usually got slowmotion and when i won the battle, my trophy didnt grow and i didnt get medallion too. Please fix it
Bull Night 1 I just suckits not the problem. night 2 spring trap is at my door by thy time I can reboot 1 system. P.s in game 1 you are supposed to loose power 24.7
It WAS a good app... Why do you guys keep ruining a good app The new interface is completely unintuitive. It's very difficult to find recently purchased books, especially when reading across multiple devices.
Virus Didn't seem no different then the free version for tried playing it and it had the same games. But now since the latest update my system did an update and found a virus in this program and erased it on me.
Won't work. I've tried opening this app to play and it won't even get past the first screen and freezes my phone up.
Can't even open app, click on icon screen goes black and crashes,
New pics It takes forever to get new pics and if you have been on another funny picture app you've already seen the ones that are new
Not working anymore on my Nexus 4 I have now Android version 4.4.4 and when I open de app I can't do anything with it. It seems the touchscreen does not work with the app. It sucks. Please fix it
May aswell go directly to the bom site dame info
Keeps crashing I try to play someone and it says oops something went wrong please try again. It does it every time won't let me play. Uninstalled...
I bought the 20 bucks thrice but didnt get any bucks at all Please give me a refund, and will be 5 stars again
I don't really like puzzle games. Thought it be more of a adventure type of horror game.
Crashed right in the middle of the 1st game playin and all was good, then it just crashed, VERY FRUSTRATING
Error It has been saying error for what seems like a couple months before it worked fine  then today I deleted it and reinstalled it and it won't let me log in
I thought it was a game But profile of wwe players
Fix the crashing Same old shit as the first release. Get your shit together zillion whales, I get your project team didn't take lessons from the first project. Would definitely be a 5 if that is solved.
Suck Computer giving oponent low number cards and giving me high number of card.always computer knocking also with gin.i dont like
Bure kabisa This it work well bt when when you reset the phone everything in the application get disappear. Please get my images n videos back so tht I can rate u with 5 stars
Buggy,ugly on tablet Feels terrible and slow to respond to taps, balls dissappear or fly in the opposite direction you shoot them sometimes. Ads are not super noticable so good on that. Game is playable but not enjoyable on my tablet.
Good but Its not reading the roms I download. I didn't pay 4 dollars for an GBA GB GBC emulator that doesn't play games I download.
Internet connection problem Always says i have no internet connection but i do. I can use my other apps just not snapchat.
Why only the BRACELET Only bracelet is unlockedI dont like it and most of accessories are locked whyPlease make alk the things free so I will give you 5.
Hate it When I got it it was super fun I had lots of stuff when I exit to eat my  dinner then i was done so I went on But it didn't save I got super mad I HATEEEEE ITTT ...P.s I feel sorry if you lost your stuff '
Not real People, don't get fooled by this game, go install the real one The graphics arn't even the same This one is the stalker
Doha Salwa rood doha safari market
Not working properly Bingo icon doesn't even come up for you to score a bingo at times. Uninstalling
Black screen Like the other players, all I can see is black screen after the download. But when you tap the screen, you can hear sounds. Why is that
Fake Of course u can't use it.... Stop these fake things already
Stupid This sucks i took so long to load
App is very good. But does not work on lollipop and sandwich version. It does work on Samsung s4
Sucks I tried to move my king when I was in check and it wouldn't let me and I lost DO NOT GET THIS ANYONE
Too many cheaters. GPS spoofers and log scrappers. That aside, the game is usually won by city to state size fields. BAFs. Not much fun unless you like to make BAFs.
Would be better if you could play Stuck before I even get in the game downloading new files 00
Crash mulu anying Ini kenaps crash mulu... kecewa gue satu satunya lu aplikasi, gua gak bisa baca komik dong 
Very disappointed.. Going to delete this app if u can't fix it..I used Shazam all, but when I updated it, it won't even open. I've asked several times for a response,  haven't gotten one...I cleared cache like u said.Still not working.....
love iet when  you are in trubel you kan youse it when you are in trubbel .ore if there is somebody tholking to much .
Cheater Downloaded but not credited the amount. The worst ers
Fix After the latest update the game doesn't work. The sounds come on and all I see is a black screen. Please fix I paid for a app and want it to work. I'm a fan of the series.
Unable to install on Galaxy S6 with Lollipop I keep getting error 505 and the app is completely unusable. Would appreciate if the developer could resolve the issue because I heard great things about the app, but it is useless to me.
Not loading I got the update just fine, but when I tried to play anything, it would go to the loading screen but never got to the game I even tried Uninstalling  it but it still won't work. This was my favorite  game too
Why does it need so many permissions Way to many permission requests.
No refund
I won't even read this game one star but I did This game is so stupid you need so many coins to buy coin operated a I would rather play bill Climb racing
Enough with the spam Let me pay once and get rid of the ads.  Once Not a monthly subscription
The bad game in this world
Needs more compatability Doesn't work on rooted note 4 with lollipop 5.0.1
Jackpot party slots Every time Ihave more than 800thousand Points ,this games decides  that it should bet the max bet,without me making that decision..What a scam.Are you doing this so that I have to buy coins
Horrible The audio is so bad do not get this game if you want ears
Very bad It looks like they did this in a day. Goalies are the worst except the team you go against. If you lose a face off. They score.  I hope they can fix this game in the next update.
Sound doesn't work
Resume How do you resume a game with robots after exiting and relaunching the app Also, the texts on this app are really small. It's really hard to read it on a phone.
Unplayable on Nexus 6 Completely unplayable. Every time I try to move, it freezes and skips around. The most powerful phone and it doesn't work.
App not licensed even though I paid for it Can't use it after payment
Great game going bad Developers dont answer email, nor do basic testing.  Game has become unusable.  Very sad.  Highly recommend do not buy. Used to be my commute game.
Boring Nice job setting up but kinda boring,no affense
Not properly synced with the music after saving the video.
No stations available for Northeast Florida  Absurd. Plus, the nearest station listed in N. GA doesn't work.  What a waste. Waste of time and money.
What the heck Every time I play on it, it restarts like..... It use to not do that now it does.Fix it plz
Doesn't work Ever since I finished chapter 1 the game doesn't allow me to go further, such as on chapter 2 the screen turns blue or on the elite the game crashes.
play yourself ...it's waste of time not getting any better things on daily claim....its better i play some other online game....you should be a shame on yourself and hopless for developing these stupid game..
Progress erased App just exited and my progress was reset to the beginning. I have no desire to play something where I am in constant fear of losing the time I've invested.
Ads freeking game I have seen games wid ad's posters in between. But this is the game wer you  will find ad's videos too.In order to play a single game you need to select 100options and then you have to deal with the ads. DND Do not Download
Need help I emailed the support already, and waiting for response. This app closed itself after some black screen, really disappointed.
Bad Worse worse worst worst
Another extra cash I'm really disappointed, unlocking important features for extra cash, is not fair..50 for app without such as these features, is too expensive.  For free Would you refund
Fake app This app got fake people fake messages everything is fake being ofline it doesn't mean that we should get fake messages repeatedly damn fool
This app is biased towards new players My rating has plummeted and the reason is the app distributes the beta hand towards the less rated player. This is BS
Wedding Dash Deluxe I want my money back.  The game froze on the first level
Birthday seat lost Booked using this nice app. Booked the lovers seats for me and girlfriend... in 4th row and it moved us to normal seats in the 3rd row from the back. Good thing is the seats were still together. ..amazingly.
Only worked one time Opened it and it only worked one time. The next level it when u put the shape where it belongs it won't work and keeps making the ding sound.
Attention please When i tried to open it, it takes too long to load eventho my Internet showed excellent .. gtMalaysia n using Samsung S5 ... please fix
Super diamond Boring
App stopped working App was working fine the first few weeks...then stopped working.
Hacker Full of shit timer hacker
Rate the song I like the app. There was a mistake made with the stars. I wanted to rate it all 5 stars That's why I usually don't rate things because of this mistake has happened before.
Rob Farrell This is crap. It keeps crashing.
Dark Strokes Paid 2.99 and the game refuses to load. Reinstalled 4x,same results . Would like either refund or credits.
Cannot register Japanese character I use Quizlet to learn japanese. However whenever I input an answer with Japanese character it would immediately turns into latin characters. Please fix this
Worst cricket game One of the most stupid game i have played.....no shot timings....no real timing....bad graphics....even games in 1980's were way way better than this cricket 
Horrible When I put on it would not come on
Won't store saved games I'm not sure if it's me. But if I force close all my apps. The save file disappears.  I don't see a save button too.
Thats not the german anthem... wtf It doesnt sound anything like the german anthem.
this site is an extortipnate rip off. be warned
Doesn't work
Waste of money This game is crap, can't see nothing too large on screen, don't do what it says waste of money,
Awful
Can't marry a woman What are you, homophobes
Epic Fail Looks good BUT looks can be deceiving. App takes a long time to load, difficult to find some of the options like mute AND NO WIDGETS
Didn't work Had no sound for my phone don't know if its the app or my phone.
Crashes on opening with android 5 This was not a cheap app. It was OK while it worked. Now it closes immediately after opening on my nexus 7. Please, developers, sort this out
Stops too much
9 rooms Dont download easy game and at the end nothing happens.
Will not load Stuck trying to load on see all screen. Very upset toddler
It's sucks Keeps starting my video over every time I got out from my Xbox to my phone  it does this now iv been having problems loads anything now so plz fix it iv been watching wwe since It was wwf and never missed a show or ppv
Never get passed loading screen It loads loads and loads Can't get passed the loading bar... Download game three different times
Doesnt play the right tune
New update needs fix Touch does not respond in side menu. Looks clean though
This game sucks .  All you do is dig. 
This apps is fake I check my finger show different result every time so don't waste your  time.
I have purchased it via google play. it is showing installed. but the app is not availablein my device
Bad update Loved it before but now latest update crashes app even before its open. Disappointed
Can't see the polls on Samsung Galaxy S5
not bad not best....
I love it i think its a very nice game The baby is very cute
It's an ok app It's an ok app but location services doesn't seem to work well so always seems to think I am in Auckland.
Greatest Waste Of Time EVER Only one use for this game, send it to someone you really want to annoy
Cant get it off military time im not in the military. Other than that its ok.
Black screen on SGS4 Used to work but now it shows a black screen after a short time. I paid for this app and demand a fully functional game.
This sucked Didn't install and took my 2.99
Not good The person who developed it dont know anything about tabla
Only open one instrument east 22 mb data
Meh Nothing really happens in the game.  It's kinds boring.  Did the whole game in an hour or so. I thought the epic ending was fun though.  It would be fun if it was more diverse.  It needs more on the aggressive side.
Hearts Very poor now. Unlucky game to play for virtual cash.
No stickers Purchased but stickers never showed up in app
Keeps shuting off This game won't let me get to double jeopardy, when switching from one level to the second its kicks me out saying the game quit.  Very disappointed.
Don't install this apps Totally useless appsguys dont wast your time.all are fake
Ads Wayyyy toooo many ads for my liking  if you can live with them, the game's pretty good fun, but extremely challenging.
Self promotion This app sends out way to much self promotion and begs for ratings to often  And considering I use the Pro version I really don't want self promotional messages from it
Unstable Slow to update  unstable
Worst game It is the worst game ever seen ....i jst hate it..doesnt doesn't work properly
Not able to view the images on app in my Google nexus5.  Please fix it then I give 5 stars.. Otherwise no stars
Wonderful game, but keeps freezing My daughter loves this game. It worked the first time she played it, but now when she mixes the ice cream up, when it comes out of the blender, it freezes. She's gutted. 
Terrible  game It cheats,  not fun when the game cheats,  don't waste your money  or time.
What I was playing it just fine and then I finished the valentine box and now the game won't open anymore. It just crashes when I try to run it.
Free app is better I had 316 elements and for some reason nothing will import so i have to start all over.  Also the one I just paid for keeps closing and giving me an error.  Great game,  crappy version.
Very bad No verybad
I also read reviews App kept crashing once I opened it. Only saw I got 30 coins then it closed. Reopened it a couple more times and did the same thing
Game sticks, won't load, does not pay out on poker games..use to love playing it now not so much And a paid app should not make you reach levels on the skins that you were able to change before anytime you wanted..I do not recommend 
It dont work When it says import combos from alchemy free it then doesn't import anything total rubbish
Doesnt work On the site it said it works on iphone... It does NOT
Awful game control'a are so bad very annoying something so easy to do makes it so difficult wouldn't recommend this game
Bus Tracker Eats Data Using the bus tracker once a day for 5 days and just long enough to see where bus, is results in 270Mb. Please optimise this feature
Not working on 5.1 Hi please fix or refund the purchase amount
Me tooo It have only and olny 2 game yuk tuto toons if you want 5 star from all the users so unlock all
This app is terrible if i click in a certain song or album the i want to listen to that particular album or song not you giving me a set of suggested songs based off of what i chose if i wanted that i would have put on pandora
      .
What It only goes one thing then nothing else uhhhhh 
Chuthiya Cant daonload
It's pay to win  Sucks 
Push notifications. I turned off all of the push notifications, they still happen. I don't want to be constantly bombarded with this crap.
Crashes frequently This game crashes on my phone a lot, and at random points in the game. Sometimes the last turn, sometimes mid game. It'd be a great way to play Small World of the game didn't force quit more often than not.
Someone messed up  4 hour bonus is the only thing that kept this game playable  Unless you are into spending real money to lose fake money by the truck load . Now that's gone .Which means pointless to keep game . Aside from that it's stellar
Updates make this too laggy to use Recent updates to this game have rendered game play impossible. Should this not be resolved with the next update,  I shall have to uninstall it.
Not working Cannot opening after updating lollipop in my galaxy s4 getting error while downloading some 927 error something. I downloaded from third party app installed eventhough not working. Help me
Poor THE CONCEPT IS GOOD, BUT THE GAME IS PRACTICALLY UNPLAYABLE DUE TO THE CONSTANT INTERRUPTION  OF ADVERTS.
Hanging hanging hanging Many times hanging..
Don't download Worst handling of bikes...  Wasted  and  with data
Ugh Every time I try to play this, it crashes.  If you're going to charge for a game, make it playable  Fix the problem or refund my money
hang my tab only on loading screen waste my money
I can't even open it Horrible.
Cute but.... What are the diamonds for
Keeps logging out
Battery drained fast Had been holding on to iphone because it used to be available for ios. didnt see anything difference except battery. For 1 level, 3 of the battery gone  .
UC Brouser Surf it supar slowwww It will super fast when you install it. After this it will slower and at last it will waste of time so I will uninstall it if problem continued.
Why can't KitKat block texts Useless
Mic feedback is terrible. Add mic volume control please. Im gonna have to return game now cause its useless
One day it just forgot I have the Plus One day it just forgot I have the plus and my internal storage got full. Whatever I do it's saying I need to upgrade when I am already upgraded.
Screen goes blue and freezes.
Junk I agree with everyone else's comments. This app is garbage Don't waste your time 10,000 downloads or 10,000 people most likely bamboozled out of a dollar I will pay the publishers another dollar to kindly remove their app trap.
It won't load past the first screen.
Annoying notifications This app sends annoying notifications even if you turn them off in the settings. Fix the sound issues in the individual slots. Also, what happened to the lobby music
Update sucks This was my favorite game but the update basically erased all my stuff and makes it almost impossible to pass a certain level.
Launch screen freezes After Galaxy S6 fw update to lollipop, game freezes on startup. Please fix
What's with all the adds... Every time I try to do something another stupid commercial pops up... Really  I would of rated the game higher if I actually able to play more the 10 see ones every 5 minutes This game is starting to go down the drain
Annoying Notification Symbol I've had an annoying notification showing the number 1 for weeks and no response when I've reported it and requested help. You'll get 5 stars back when you give me my help.
Too bad Its a good game but I had to eat so I turned my device off and came back later. When I tried to load the game its wouldn't get to the charachter selection, it would just crash. Too bad
Seems like a fun game but... It crashes after beating the introductory level. I'm using a Nexus 6. Hope it gets fixed soon.
Not working This app does not work, at the moment it's telling me North is South West. 
It is a gyp. You get only ONE instrument. One, that is all. The other instruments you have to pay for. Not worth it, especially since the title says instruments implying more than one instrument is accessible.
If you pay, ads still pop up Come on, if you cough up 10 for an app you shouldn't continue to be bombarded with ads for other apps, especially not when the device is going to be in the hands of curious children. Please change this.
Does not lock incoming calls anymore M unable to lock my incoming calls after d update 
Don't play this game It's not a game like hill climb racing
Battery drain through GPS after update Love this launcher, works like a charm, however after last update solo is constantly tapping in on GPS resulting in serious battery drain Pls fix is quickly and get my five stars again
Won't let me get a refund
A fab app, but doesnt work on my tablet however it is fine on my phone 
Great game but I have not been able to access the transfer market since I downloaded the game. Only 2 stars until that is fixed. There should be an option for longer matches too.
Donna I think you need to check some of the people on this site. Grown men trying to get with children really. Nothing but filthy men on here
To many add's ........  its free and they need to make money, so i guess you get what you dowload for free......
Addicting game STOP CRASHING Need to update or do something. It seriously crashes every 30 seconds. I wrote that a flipping MONTH AGO Yep, it's still crashing. They better do something about it soon. Because, I'm starting to lose interest
Terrible IM struggling to stear. Totally hate it
Mixer To many pop up adds
IDK It takes for ever my connection is connected but iy says its NOTSO
Needs some tweeking When I load the app it's very slow. When I get collectibles I can't see them. They seem to be loading but don't show up.
if could rate zero. why da fuk do i have to download another thing goddamnit. close and 1 star. every user dont like to download contents after the main game download.
This is only instrumentS if you pay Otherwise, it is merely a xylophone, and not the best free one out there, either
I have full 10 mbs of WiFi signal network on game still say can't connect u suck ppl uninstall
Votre localisation ne vous permet pas bla bla bla
It stops U can do 23 races and it stops and dont response u need to restart or to report maby we should report it. Its a good game but with lot of problems
Not working on note 3 neo This game is a dumb not working i can't even play a starting stage
Dubious Permissions Permissions requested give developers ability to identify phone and serial number. This is more intrusive and different to the other Dr Panda titles I have for my daughter.  Developers please explain.
Don't get all free
There are flaws in this game
Beas o poop play  about a hundred games finally be able to upgrade to a new bow in the next time you're back at square one what junk pile I'm greedy sob should be
Quit syncing After I updated my wife's iPhone with Money Wiz 2, this Android version quit syncing with it. It says I need to update to latest version to sync. Guess what Android doesn't have the latest version so this is worthless now.
Add covers up how to play
Upset I just did the update and now the unicorns are gone, what the heck , there are a few kinks... the scratch cards are messing up, in game sometimes it messes up. If they fix this it would be great
Please fix bugs in dominion event. We have a tied even we won the tower. The oponent doesnt do any attack but its a tied. I dont get it.
This WAS a great game. When I bought this game it was awesome now after a few updates it is laggy and even a little fuzzy, so slow its unplayable for me. Please fix these problems.
Dont download this game This is the wrost game ever i seen
Ok but has flaws One being that it blocks the screen when asking about making a second move. After pressing ok and seeing it wasn't a good idea I pressed undo, only it didn't undo blacks move and was permanently blacks turn.
The game is great, but with the recent graphical update it has become unplayable for me. The tiles are barely readable and the background is a mess. Would give five stars, but two is the best I can do now.
Ridiculous AD's Everytime it loads and I select a catagory an AD appears. . Wth is with that I dont mind an ad but when it constantly takes you back to the load screen then we gots somr issues  please fix it somehow
Need to pay to submit scores via your phone No wonder there so many ringers winning the local comps. Make it free and easy to submit your score. Make your money through advertising like every other app
It is for dummies Hated it
I got some problems I like this app, in fact I have paid for it but since I have updated my tablet to kitkat it became slower and widget does not work at all. Please Meteogroup what can I do
Needs ketchup Dont listen to me and anyone else this game sucks hard and u know what else i cant grammar well and this sentence will never end because of such and on that i will take my leave by saying CASH GRAB. MAJOR OF CASH GRABTOWN
Wth My bro is moaning 4 it and its a balnk screen just delete the app or just fix it i didnt even wanna give 1 star its 0 stars tbf its the truth
BANNED I GOT BANNED FOR NO REASON I DIDN'T DO ANYTHING WRONG
Ad City. It was fine when I first started playing it. But the lack of locations and now ads pop up after every attempt, just don't have time to deal with it.
Good but short Great game but only 9 levels. Very quick to beat
Ripoff I got 5 wilds and it gave me nothing
Sure app
Bad I refund it since it is bad i buy it than i will buy again no don't ever buy this 
The worst game I ever played. Please do not install it . In box 3 there is a level where I cannot control it. Why
Worst This is the worst copy of mario
BAD KEEPS BOMBING OUT
Not loading The game gets about 90 loaded then quits I've tried uninstalling it, restarting my phone, and stopping the game from running then loading it and nothing works. Use to work just fine until the last few updates.
Bad Way to many ads
Lemonade
Doesn't open after first use Doesn't open the 2nd time you use it.   Rip off.   Free version works fine.  What a jip.
Somthings wrong. It wont let me join my friend it keeps saying the session is full other than that the game is ok but please fix this for full stars
Game is just slow... Not sure if this has been optimized for Lollipop or a QHD screen or both. Please fix...
Cannot read from SD card This was the perfect comic reader until Android 5.0. Now the app cannot read from an SD card. You have to manually load each comicfolder when you want to read from the SD card.
Boring. Don't waste your time on this free game.
It sucks No good
Stopped working.... Come on guys.. What the heck All of a sudden half my movies doesnt have audio This is after a recent update Fix it. Also, why cant i choose which audio stream to play with This is a basic feature of any dvd player
Won't work Says my program isn't licensed. I have Galaxy Acer style. I deleted a lot of apps and waited along time to play it. Please fix
Why I really love the game but suddenly it stopped working . I know  people  who still can play it but why cant i and some other players Fix this  bug as soon as possible 
Fuck of you Very boring game don't download this game
Always stuck in the outbox. Cannot send out my emails And some attachments eg pics and pdf cannot be downloaded even they are smaller than 1MB
Doesn't work Shuts down immediately. Waste. My daughter's upset it should be compatible but isn't working.
Good game It's a great game I love playing it. But it crashes and then won't load anymore... I've tried un installing and re installing and I loose everything then the same thing happens again... kinda wish I hadn't paid for it..
Paid songs crash program The free version was great, but when I paid for additional songs the program locked up and never worked again
Monopoly millionaire The game crashes after every move This game sucks especially since it costs money to download, you get what you pay for. In most cases anyway
Not fair Consistently gives better hands to Bridge Baron opponent Easy to see that because you can expose all hands.
Doesn't Work Doesn't do anything, maybe that's what it's suppose to do If so, then it works perfect HATE WASTING MY DATA DOWNLOADING CRAP LIKE THIS...
Huge problem When I try to start a new game,it always loads for a couple of minutes then returns me to the home screen automatically. I don't know why. Please help
i changed my mind you see i had to uninstall this game because i was low in space on my phone then when i install it back i have to start all over again so this game sucks
Not working it didn't record my voice and  when I  chose  Wich voice I want to sound like it just shuts down and goes out
Anthonymartinkingyahoo.co.uk Ap wont conect to my corsa but works on my phone
Add screens won't  allow game exit. Don't  publish the damned thing if it isn't ready, dingbats.
Stops in middle of game I am in the middle of a game and it just stops working. I than have to restart the game but I can never get through the game as it keeps stopping. Please fix
Doesn't work All of bill curlers games are my favorite in the casino. But on my phone they don't work at all.
Doesn't show up Can't equip watch face. It's non existent and I paid for it. LG G4  LG G Watch.
Annoying This game has the most annoying ad that pops up at the bottom and constantly blinks. You can't get rid of it.
  
Adsupported version only shows six knots.
Glitches Glitch on level 6 will not let you use pliers twice.
Wasted money Closes as soon as i open it and even after i tried reinstall
Different number on Android I love the app, but had to give it 1 star for giving me a different number on my new Android phone.
How do you get this app to work for a ps3 Im on sprint galaxy s6 it starts to work but the when im using it i will stop work and when i hook it up to my ps3 the nat type is 3 and i dont want to change my ps3 to dmz
More about advertising than gaming This shitbag of a driving game is an embarrassment but dare I say, par for the course these days. Wadding through 68 ads before even a hint of driving was a downer too. Avoid, unless into self flagellation.
The update is Soooooooo......Messed up, all that did was make it slow it never passes the welcome page.that sucks big time I use to love this app you all better fix this snail effect
Not on Gallery Picture gallery doesn't come up on the list of apps that will swivel. That was the one I wanted.
Proble merror 
The water graphics are ATROCIOUS. Extremely pixelated on my LG G4, so it's not a problem with my phone. I paid for this game and the graphics sucks. I want a refund.
Wth It just says access denied don't download it u will be in trouble 
 refreshapp
Very cool but Every time it's become freezing then I have to force close and reopen it..fix it please...then I will give 5 
Mcstuffin IT DOESNT WORK AT ALL AND I PAID FOR THIS FOR MY GRANDAUGHTER, WTF VERY DISAPPOINTED AND GIVE ME MY F IN MONEY BACK, Just take people's money
Unfortunately Stopped As I start playing the game stops. Even when I am using Note Edge
Cube Hard 2 play
Cmplete bullshit Waste of tym.....damn bad.....glad dint waste mich tym......worst app ever downloaded......msg to adrs....DO NT DOWNLOAD .....WORST APP EVER.....CMPLTE BULLSHIT..
Good
Love you guys but I can't open this app on my android tablet....looks like I wasted my money
Much better before update I used to love this game. Now it's so watered down it's barely worth playing .
It was great. Until Lollipop Please fix this  lollipop came out how long ago This is pathetic. I loved this app, but now its pathetically slow on lollipop. Please fix Uninstalling.
Get spammed with Ads, lags at strategic points of a rally, Shots are randomly out ie. having done the exact same thing before and I win the point on any court surface. Sometimes the type of shot swiped is not what actually happens.
Boring Just nine levels and then over again What the heck
Freezes I'm at the part where you put your name in and I put it in and it freezes PLEASE patch I like it a lot
Great game, but keeps crashing Great game, but now after the update it crashes constantly...
error download help me,my device unable to download this.
Keeps closing on me I really like the game but it keeps freezing and then it closes although some times it doesn't close and I have to close it because it just up and freezes
Could not download due to an error.... Try to download several times but still fail... Please fix
Error 1021475 Can't play the game at all, whenever i try to swap players from my sqaud it says server error 1021475. Pls fix
Update ruined game Can't even play it now, it just keeps crashing.
Nothing like Moorhuhn By far nat as attractive as the old desktop version. Would be good a free game only.
No wonder you lost 20 MILLOIN DOWNLOADS You don't let android people play jerk
Why add the shadows again I gave this back a five star but now with the shadows added again I give it a different rating.
Eh.... I'll give u 5 stars if you add Redstone. For now, this game is pretty terrible.
Bad, Don't waste MB  nosto krben na..
What First action Where should i go first, its confusing. Give clear instruction. Damnnnn... grrrrr..
Kinda cool but, This game is a glitched out piece of 
It's a good game but it lags and glitches Sometimes the music lags and it jumps when you don't want it to besides that this game is amazing
Hard to open I can only open over a network. Otherwise it keeps informing me that I need to update Google Play or set up a billing payment
To many ads Everything is great but the ad's also if this had exhibition like madden it would be an amazing game
Does not work while in Airplane Mode Why can't I play while in Airplane Mode I still have wifi. What do you need to access on my phone that you you can only do in normal mode
Cannot push play after entering my sons name.
Good game but The game restarts every time u die... Have to defeat the same boss every time.... 
Immersive mode still second class citizens Can't enter immersive mode by clicking on a gif. Titles cut off in immersive mode
I hate this game Every time I run my team dont grad and they let them run right to me and when they get on the ground and you right be side them you fall right with them
No instructions
Good But can read without conneting wifi.sorry give 1 star..
Ok but don't get it No it's not a big fun game so you can get it but I think you should not so plz don't get it
Uuhhh I thought this game would have different things to do
Sorry but the game is kinda bad because it is very simple and the race is easy and boring.
First time install I installed and signed up and got nothing but a black screen on my Note 4. You might want to make sure your app actually works from time to time.
Why cant i choose my own car Ive tryed 3 times to start this game and every time it just gives me the alfa i hate that car. So yea this sucks
Adirritation Please remove the adverts Otherwise better app than the 1st one, except for the layout.
Totally rigged One minute you have total control and are dominating play and then all the sudden your opponent becomes a brick wall... such a shame because it was a really good game before this happened Uninstalling for sure
Waste of time Played ok at first, now won't open. Don't waste your time. Very disappointing.
HORRIBLE APP....DONT WASTE YOUR TIME Grammar errors, wrong answers...if anything,this app will make you fail your test by confusing you more
Boo 5 options and most plain suck
Crashes every time Once you tune out all the ads, it's fun for the approximately 60 seconds that it runs before locking up. Nice looking pictures though. I enjoyed putting them 5 together and then having to force close.
I have filled my family tree. I press new generation and it says the first line has to be removed, yet it doesnt remove it so i cant continue playingFix this issue. Add more things to buy on full version.
Refund Horrible game refund ore else
Just don't get Controls are bad, teams aren't even actual teams, just don't, if you really want something good then get First Touch Soccer, soooooo much better.
Help Everything was working fine but now its not working right after my daughter finishes the chore it freezes it dosent want to go back to go to the next chore Nothing happens I need someone to Please Fix this
One word .... horrible. Would give it no stars if i could
Awful update This update is horrible.  Game will not load.  I've installed it eight times. Give me the original game back The update screwed up everything.
Crash  Purchase issue I purchased the full theme with 1000 Rs. Again it is asking for payment for some themes. After updating to purchasing it is getting crashed.
problem when i do UNfollow Dear Team plz fix this problem i cant unfollow more then 10 or 15 people in one hour,plz fix it as soon after that i wll give 5 star now 1.
Crashes constantly Love this app on iOS but constantly crashes losing student work. No export to PDF feature either
Stainx There are popups for different games that come up. Right at the beginning of rounds that you click when you go to shoot your first bubble. Doesn't tell you when you beat all the levels you just go round in circles lol
Red Zone Color Draw No Work
Bullshit Every time I play it u play for 1520 min then it logs out
Good app but keeps crashing I go to update the db and it crashes everytime. Please fix.
I Don't Know Why Bam I get texture pack and then booms no texture WHY so fix it or 1 star 
Kutti ka bacha Panchod
I loved this game Yasmine
Why do I get less tokens with the paid version than with the free version. Although they accumulate faster 10 min vs 20 min, I have to switch over to the free version to finsh games. Not smart Getting rid of paid version.
Good
Hearts Low rating because it jams every 23 days and I have to go thru the disinstallinstall process each time.
Boring Sad to say that the game is not what is used to be...
Why it keeps downloading content over and over again When it reached 99200,it goes back to 0200. And now I cant play.
Give me a refund now I have begged mom to buy this and I gave her the money and I'm 15 years old and I have no money and it keeps kicking me out update it or refund me make a choice
Not amazing Static during the songs 
Lame Should keep tapping the screen. Its not what actually as expected...
Stupid and idiots probelly made this game just for fun My 2 year old brother knows more animal sounds then this and its bull
Dont work Both fone and ps4 on the same network but will not find it but works on my tab which is not ideal z3 compact
Galaxy s 3 Keeps freezing after finishing a level.  Please fix. Overall good game very addictive it keeps loosing connection and I have 4bars
Why Why do you need to pay
Please give me my money back the game dosint work It Start's and then the screen just goes black
Terrible This app takes up a lot of internal memory,  which would be understandable... if it worked The app took about 30 minutes to download and after all of that time it won't  even open Very disappointed,  particularly after paying for it...
Good Nice
My pari2yrslike this types apps.
Solitaire Had trouble loading ,freezing
I have uninstaller and reinstalled and still saying installing.   Please fix this and will get higher ratings.
Issue When I block some caller,same caller calls again....App block call....its fine.But it changes my phone profile from genereal to silent.What should I do
Um...... I like just that it only goes up to level 8. Please fix. If fixed I will rate 5 stars
No more screen cast The last update sucks Before i was able to cast my phone's screen to the tv with just a few clicks... Now i dont even know how to do this anymore or if this is even possible....
Keep asking me to upgrade premium
Please FIX The only game I can play is the first one because the second and third one's close this is ridiculous fix or I'm reporting
No career mode with manager ability Where is the career mode with management part  That's what made me buy the game. Not to drive around some dumb tractors
Too many glitches Kid loves it but it constantly stops working. Cannot play it for 5 minutes without it unexpectedly stopped working. Also the music still plays when app is closed out. Have to restart my phone to get it to stop. Save your 1.99.
Not workin After the update still not werkin..  It used to be working pretty well... but not anymore
It will not stop freezing
Alexander This app is so easy to use  and it gives u  lyrics so u can sing along.
It won't let me play When ever I click on the picture I want to play it says please wait app is loading and then it closes it can you take care of that problem please
Its ok I would be more fun if it wasn't 5.99 Maybe drop the price on its you made a big profit on it already maybe try 4.99.
I cant login...its showing something is not right....please solve the issue
It is not working
Was super excited I'm not sure what's going on, not a single rom I've downloaded yet seems recognizable to this emulator as none appear in the games list. If I can't get it to work by tomorrow I'm asking for a refund.
Nexus Player Support I am not able to click anything to be able to play.
Was great, now has problems When subverting challenges you it breaks into the middle of your gabe to tell you Caused me to be kicked out of the tournament and unable to get back in
Ruined The last update has left the app unusable. Nothing loads now. Was working like a charm prior to the update. 
I hate this game Don't  play this  game
Not funny
Adsssss.. I hate to pop ads this game suuuuuckkkkkkkkksssss...
Horrible Don't ever pay this game because it doesn't have so many opened
doesn't bring out a clear outcome as i expected.very borrying
Unit t Converter plus This app is poor. For example the only currency conversation rate available is from the selected currency to USD. It's not possible to go straight from EUR to GBP. It's useless.
Hated Not so cool game it won't work too
Good
Not a fair game I played this morning an the other player wouldn't play hacked the game an WON . the next game the player didn't play, it froze, then said HaHa smhhh he WON that's why I rate this game 1 y'all need to fix this problem ASAP
Ads Nice little unity game but I won't tolerate unskipable video ads. Uninstalled.
Dog Pish
Poor Easily bested by Google maps
Could be better Cant connect pokemon blue or red with pokemon yellow this is a big problem the only reason i got the app....its now a waste of time highly disappointed i expected better from this app how sad and pathetic
Verification code not sent....
DOES NOT WORK
It's OK could of had better deals and upgrades Who the heck would say I would love to kill kids Pryce Kelly yayou
Worst AI ever Wish I didnt waste my money on this app. At first seems cool but as you get deep into game it starts handicapping you against the main character Tenniel. Game starts doing crappy things to make sure computer beats you.
Ok but after a while it is not allowing me to make anymore
Cant have my 4 year old play it cause of the pop up adds coming up every single minute.. ridiculous. Gonna uninstal it
Can't stop easily Ok, but I can't stop it Mostly stupid graphics, could be so much better. Kind of a waste of money in my opinion.
Lamia yes I can try again yes ok Dbhefb fhx
I like it Samsung galaxy grand  2
Fake, Iam on pace maker 60 pmin.this app. Shows 72p m.totaly fake .
Constant freezing When the app works, it's great. But it only works for 3 minutes before freezing on both smart phone and Kindle Fire. So it's completely unusable.
Update stinks Why change to squares the rounded corners weren't as distracting.   Why take away the round  outstanding games notification   and why the giant sections. The old game was better. This one is offensive to look at.
Jams up phone Ever since new update,  every time i reset my phone this particular app needs to update, And i reset my phone everyday.   Screen stays stuck  calls cannot be answered.  Thanks but refunds should be in order.
Terrible app  For a paid app it desperately needs a design refresh to follow Android Design Guidelines. It feels sluggish and unintuitive to use. The auto locate feature often doesn't work and just says Auckland.
Profit over playability It's too farmville. You're constantly out of a supply that you can conveniently buy for 5. I'm on a search for a game like civilization. This isn't it.
Glitchy Does not play anything like the board game. Single player campaign often marks you as failed despite fulfilling all the requirements. Feels unfinished.
Says need internet connection I love the game but I am tired of it saying I need a internet connection when I have a internet connection and the problem is getting worse you need to fix them I will change my rating
I noticed that as soon as you read it the winnings stop Yes as soon as you're ready then the winnings really decrease be careful
Needs a lot of work. Get logged out during a match and you lose all your progress. Login screen glitchy, rarely works. Board and pieces way to small. Will someone please make a better stratego game already 
Stopped working after last update Stopped working after last update. On sony xperia z tab. Please fix asap
Went from best to worst Customer service sucks. I sent 5 emails and they never replied to any for the help I needed.
Opening it When I installed it and then I clicked on it but it opened and then went back to the home screen and I saw somebody say that they had a samsung galaxy 3 and the spring unsprung version didn't work on their phone
Ireally hate it This is the worst game of all. Donot download this game ever in your life . Faltu game fully bachwas
Reema Das... It is very bad game. It is not working only
Doesn't work Says I'm going 0 mph
Edwin L. Smith The game is great, but the support SUCKS. AFTER PROBLEMS WITH 3 REAL STEEL GAMES BEING LOST THAT WERE COMPLETE AND NOT RESTORED AFTER AN ANDROID UPDATE.  NOW THIS IS THE SAME THING. DO NOT PAY THESE GAMES ,, REAL STEEL, OR PACIFIC RIM.
Don't Download it. Doesn't Work I couldn't  play it.
I  liked  this  game This game was very nonsense game and it will hang your phone
I paid for the game and now it has ads. Also annoying notifications with sound after I have turned all sound off. It's a shame because otherwise it's a good game
I go in for this I go in and every time i try it says Game Wizard has stopped PLZ FIX OR I WILL REPORT AGAIN
Crap My three figures showed three results. Too much adds. Annoying. Waste of time
Its crashing... Evrytime I click on tap to start button, it takes me back to my mobile home screen and game gets close..
Annoying Ad Great game besides the annoying Sprint Ad which forces me to open my browser, force close the webpage, and the restart the game happens every two to three levels or so. Will fix rating when ad is removed or fixed.
No multi player I have tried to connect to a game for 2 days and have had no success what so ever. Great game but I will uninstall if this connection issue continues
Can't use It down loaded upside down. Even after I turned off auto rotate it still  shows upside down
Stupid app Why you have to exclude other packages..we all pay DStv.
Used to work Doesn't work
Fking sht Levels are repeated 23 times. Very poor graphics. Pls don't download.
List empty Suddenly there is no schedules anymore it says list empty
I give up Im never playing it again just seems the develapers will only be the winners on this gaming app scammers
Poor controls Game is not easy to control. Mickey Mouse game designed for kids 10 who no longer watch Mickey Mouse
Good
Kaya ko to instal para mag karoon ako ng 100 gold
Terrible Ads upon ads and the app is so terrible at memory management it takes 15 minutes to change the volume
Bakavas Don't waste your time in this application.
Pass the buck no help support,  typical.
The paying  sht   its too expensive for me u know 4.99 I'm only 3 ..... 13  
Picture I thought that this is a good game but,,,it only shows a batsman and a umpire's picture
WARNING Doesn't work on Samsung galaxy ace properly. Don't download if you don't want to waste money. I need a refund
This app stops and freezes to many times...taking back my rating of 5...now rated 1, and deleting app.
Cannot buy a vowel during the round
Horrible The goalie is always out of the goal and sometimes out of the crease how is he supposed to save the goals And this game just sucks all around NEVER BUY THIS GAME IT SUCKS
Waste of data  I dosent work at all . whenever i start the game it takes me to the homescreen . wasted my data on such a useless game
Palhaada Cade o 1,2 e 3 que paguei e sumiu quando atualizou para esse em ingls Palhaada Quero os vdeos que comprei de volta.
Save I'm having a hard time saving a post, it takes a few tries before the post is saved. Please fix, ASAP
Why GPS is not getting on  GPS not working on cyanogen mod on my Moto g 1st Gen . I checked with google maps. GPS working fine in that. But not enabling on this app even after 1 hr of use. Please fix
Update is awful. The new update is an abortion. It was fine how it was.
No upgrades just playing until you are bored
Money hungry Made it harder in order to get you to use your gems and then you have to buy more gems to keep up
Keeps crashin and slow Cant even get passed the tutorial keeps crashing after i beat the opponent with alexs bmw
Doesn't work Won't load after the bubble screen Can't even get a refund...
Acabei de baixar Est pago e aparece licena vencida.
do not get This is a scam  Doesn't load at all
Wow i just bought the magnum 340 and the krone big m 500  and now it says i have to buy it again other than that its a great game but untill thats fixed or my money is returned one out of five
Won't disable notifications Despite me trying repeatedly to stop notifications of the current test match, the app alerts me EVERY WICKET. Make it stop.
One word LAG Random deaths won't let u move sometimes random jump lag surprise traps that pop up at the last second.
Wtf I mean you do not learn any thing from the musical world all you do os play around until your desperate heart continents
Ok When I'm playing 3 on 3 battle on hard the control lags your block don't block you dash lags .
Not realistic Horrible physics and game in general is dumb.
its a good game one problem with money i buyed all the bots and i did not get themi did not get one i want me money back now and plz
Good but flawed It's cute and fun but the controller mechanics need to be better.
Kills My Battery The biggest battery hog on my Droid Turbo other than screen time.
Worst ever cricket app
Won't open I purchased the full version and now it won't even open
I dont like it You mine as well go on YouTube because all its shows is youtubers people showing you how to draw i thought that its show you but it doesn't and you skip to a part .that all the complants i have
Not working at all. Waste of data
Not working my play store keeps opebing and so i assum that this app is usless.
Can't view Je peux pas regarder a Maurice
Update ruined With the new update its ruined the app, cant enter any website in or even stream showbox. Sort it out whats the point in paying for an app you cant use
Lame, kids don't like it
Stops continuously I have reinstalled 3 times and can not get past the main screen with it stopping Please fix HTC one m7
Constantly shows new achievement unlocked sign into Google plus but nothing happens ... no achievement rewards ... fix it
Won't stay connected Connects to obd connector but drops connection after a few seconds. Tried sending a debug log but it data there is no log data to send even after turning debug logging on and attempting to connect.
Hated it   hated it  hated it. Hated it
Not free. I despise apps that say they are free but really aren't. It is free for the first few letters. Its 3.95 for the rest. Just title it free preview and stop wasting parents time.
It's not working the app I am opened and login the app it's still loading I have checked 30minutes it's still loading app waste application. I have screen shots for this app loading images how to share these screen shot images.
Don't download this game it is not nice and by downloading this your time will not save
I dont like this game. Impossible stage is forever impossible because there is no levelup system, items, and any other remedies. Moreover repetition of the same work is tedious.
It sucks ballz
LOL JOKE Don't install guyz its a waste of time and net .
Just wanted to play it and then I find out you have to pay real money per level. Really great game but there's no way I can afford it.
I love it  I'm amazed
Love  it Good
Hated it Won't even let me get. Double thumbs down. Don't waste you time and money on this app. I'll give you five stars if you fix this problem.
Come on Guys, wasting 255 pesos is a waste and buying this game is worthless if its keeps on saying ERROR. Fix it for Alcatel one touch
Fruktansvrt irriterande app som efter varje spel ber om att man ska recensera spelet. Vilket gjort att jag nu snkt mitt betyg ett snpp.  Annars i sig ett trevligt spel
Popups are so horrible it ruins gameplay
Who in hell would want to play this crapy game
Disappointed Any other game remembers where you were when you get a new phone. This is the 2nd time I would need to start over Forget it
What Is this some kind of joke I open it says nickelodeon movies blah blah in cinemas February and then it just closes if that's not meant to happen please fix it cause that is really bad
what is this I have tab 3 and the game didn't work at all.Worst game ever
Not Importing I love this game so I bought the ad free version but I don't play it because it won't import my stuff from my free version
Boring Boring Boring.... Grrrrrrr gtlt
Cannot accept ToS on HTC One m8 Verizon Would love to play it on my phone but accept button will not work in ToS screen. Will change review if updated.
I LOVE THIS GAME BUT I DO NOT LIKE WHEN I HAVE TO PAY Samarah Huff
So bad This game is so bad because everything is locked and then you have to buy it all
Shuts down For the past 4 days I have not been able to play my season since the game will shut down every time its downloading. Fix this issue
Doesn't work with restricted profiles I've got a BIG PROBLEM My 2.5yo would love this app but it doesn't work with restricted profiles. It says it's downloading something and then force closes.
Its a sucking game I hate this game what kind of sender do it want. I've tilt my phone to hell to make it turn
I know i wrote this and you know you read all the comments and I know and you also know  most drivers and customers need a tip options and many changes for drivers, but I don't understand why you Uber don't care about your drivers at all
Y this game keep on saying user maintenance wait 2 hour .....it has been 5 days now....fix it soon are I will be forced to delete this game 
Can't log in, tells me no match and freezes. Needs to be fixed.
This game is... Fun but the worst It doesn't even give you your free coins you earned. I am missing atleast 500 coins from my coins because I downloaded cooking fever. This is a nice game and all... But they need to work on that
Crashes Constantly Fix it. I'm paying so it can crash over and over. Garbage. July 1st, 2015 still not fixed. Crashes Constantly.
Boring  stupid Jus so u know it's pretty boring i need to find another driving game
Unhappy Once upon a time I was happy with newshunt.. But not now.. Coz d adds has become too much.. This s so ridiculous.. Every now and then d adds pops up.. Plz fix this issue..
Doesn't play When I open it, it stays at the startup screen and I can't play.
Jaxburt Hated it. On EVERY SINGLE ROLL it stopped to show me more game APPS. Every time
Ang panget Panget
Can't log in Can log in on desktop but not on mobile. I use a password manager to automatically fill the password so it isn't a typo. I suspect the mobile app doesn't handle special characters correctly.
It worked once I bought the app and now it has become unusable. Video are un viewable no matter what bitrate or resolution. I give up.
Looked great until... This game looked great and I was really excited to play it until I downloaded it and realized that it doesn't work on my Motorola Xoom. As soon as I open it, it immediately closes and goes back to the homescreen.
Virus It won't let me click on the different cake things
Unfortunately cars has stopped Not working when i installed and downloaded game data and then i opened it shut downs and says unfortunately cars has stopped
Good but.. Plz upload 3 level
What the hell This is so laggy I couldn't even fight others also there is only 2 maps so i want a refund
Lost video and pictures I would give 5 star, I up grade phone install and cannot retrieve pictures and video, I email Web developer waited a Month and no reply.
Double hated it. Why people waste time in making such apps. Atleast utilise your skills elsewhere.
Doesn't start
really skout after paying for points and purchasing the skout app, now i have to pay for a monthly premium keep this sht up and you will lose your users quick.
Hated it I download it through mcent only for airtime ....but i did't get any  airtime ...
Didn't get It's not like the pictures up on top and hard to use
Only the alphabet. The game on the Internet is free and has more activities. Very disappointed.
The worst I hardly learnt anything I nearly quit because I am not a good drawer I rate this app infinity zero
Sucks The game keeps not loading.  It upsets my kid beyond measure. After paying for the game it should work.
Where do I start It isn't a terrible game, but my main complaint is you can't swap bubbles. Fix that and 5 stars
Needs more room Needs expansions. There's not  nearly enough room to put things. And only have six garden spaces when most of the ingredients to make things need four. The game should progress as you go. This dosent
stutter a lot like slow motion... can't even play
Faulty Images won't load The older version  was excellent but what was the need for update it was working fine. Now this app requires high speed 3G it lags on 2G please don't update again
Eh Controls are bad and the Dragon is way too big and fast for such a tiny map. There should be an Instant land option because it's too hard to land. Good Dragon graphics but thats basically all I liked
It us worst. I cant open the tri nation championship.  When I selected my team it again asks for selection
can't even get it to work so I downloaded this for my son but when we opened the app and hit the play button it took us back to my home screen  anyone know why we can't play this needhelp
WARNING  Do not download this app has a serious virus on it. If you download it your phone is in serious danger take my word for it. Download du  booster and it will help you find viruses and keep your phone safe
Crap Surprise songpop is bugged again won't let me log in through Facebook but my 10 other games log in with fb no problem chappy songpop bugged as usual
I have nothing but problems connecting and staying connected to server. Don't waste your money  I want a refund
FALTU EVER
Games keeps crashing It's so annoying You spend your in game energy and time your attacks strategically then the games crashes. Apart from this I'm enjoying the game. Just please fix this bug.
Latest update Crashes with new update can't even play one song without crashing
not user friendly to find teams  clasifications
Bara laddar hela tiden, mste vara nn bugg nu p senaste versionen
Doesn't Work I uploaded this app a few weeks ago and it does nothing for me. I was hoping the developer could fix it for me, but he hasn't responded to my email.
Not for use in the USA This app is only for vehicles in India, not for use on USA license plates.
Terrible grammar You can barely understand what it's saying...
Terrible app I do not see why this should be a subscribed app where the SAGA Golf app is presented free of charge to capture your score on the apple store. I'm switching back. 
Rubbish D rest is gr8 but plz fix the disappearing makeup and I will give u 5 star
Boring Looks and plays good at the beginning. However it will soon get boring, because lack of actuall strategy... Just shoot the most powerfull evemy untill you win.
bgj bgj
Word crack This sucks  It was okay to begin with and now it won't count words that I try to use.  I know they are words.  Things like sword, like, soar, envy. .....if it doesn't get fixed I will remove it and tell everyone I know not to even bother
Stop Don't even think to download it Waste of time stupid app useless
Not good Treble
naooooo nao quero a versao em ingles. quero a versao em portugues me devolvam minha versao em portugues nao eh so pq moro fora do brasil q vcs podem assumir e atualisar o app direto p ingles MUITO MUITO RUIM
Fix Im at level 33 on winter and when I check how many levels I need to play the season it says 0 please fix for higher rating 5 star
Debby Why I like this game because is helps me know all my spellings and that's good of me
Horrible Just a mishmash of advertising and way too much paid content designed to get children to spend money. Add to that the fact that its boring. Don't waste your time downloading it.
Memory Training No menu to choose to turn off sounds. No menu to read directions. Immediately uninstalled.
Not so great Most of the games are locked. They only allow  you 3 or 4 games. Then you must pay to unlock the rest.
Shitty When I swipe to jump across from side to side it doesnt. If you can fix it I would rate it a 5
Hate it It does not work in Mauritius.
Useless 4 year old finished in 2 minutes What was the point of paying for this when a four year old can complete it in 2 minutes flat. Very disappointing
Questions are to hard There probably thinking im Albert Einstein. Don't get me wrong im smart, but im only in 5th grade. Ese up on us jeez.
Stupid Boring
Doesn't work on s4 running lollipop Used to work, my 4 yr old saved her pocket money to wake up the other pets. Updated my phone and now the app doesn't work at all. Please fix.
Love it ,But, having a problem with level 26 of Brass Hogs not opening after completing the daily missions ,twice   What's up with that
Acha hai Ya game tik tak hai
I think the offline mode is rigged uninstalling.
given used product dear friends today i recieved CK one perfume bottle which was opened with no seal. Product was also of very inferior quality looks like mixing has been done. will not suggest any one to go for it.
Its cool, but... Forcing people to see the video ads is not a cool thing.
Worst now Loved this game and app the coin speed has increased but every time have to 're enter the names otherwise it shows game over its scrap now New option r so confusing the previous version was so good didn't need any changes . Very unhappy
Liked the old banner ads. I play while listening to books now the ads break in on the audio books. Go back to the old one. Or give us a chance to buy so no ads.
Pack does NOT show up in my Aviary Photo Editor, and Aviary hasn't replied to my email requesting help. No damned instructions available, so I'd suggest caution if you're contemplating purchasing this pack.  Not good, Aviary.
What a rip off I can't even play this game at all and too many ads, please fix
Dont buy pets I purchased all the pets as a reward for my daughter AND THEY WON'T WAKE UP Thanks for stealing my hard earned money and disappointing my daughter
Inaccurate Shows streets as green while its crowded. . Needs improvement
I was fooled Didn't read disclaimer at bottom. I think it might be illegal to actually use NOAA in your app name if not affiliated at all.  I emailed you first...no reply...uninstalled, station won't load. 0.99 is my price for not reading fully
Fake It's nothing only running game and get coins.It should be able to fight with dragon.
Terrible game Downloaded the game and played for a few minutes then turning it off. Come back to the game later and it won't open. All of this in a manner of about 5 hours.
Not much to it Alright I like my hidden object games but this is silly, all u do is put things on a table then u hav to do hidden mystery games to find things that help the thing thats on the table, hope u understand that...
Haven't been able to complete a game Seems to consistently lock up every couple turns. Sometimes when it does it leaves screen artifacts behind and the only way to fix is to reboot   wish this game would work, love the board game.
Not playable. Super small map. If you fly to high or too low you will loose the islands forever. There is a map, but it's no help.
Cannot update the app I cannot update this app anymore. Paid app should not be like this. It seems many people have facing the same problem.
Money grubbers It's content ly in your face to give them cash and you only get to play like 3 games... junk
I downloaded dis my lil girl n I open it den it gotta redownload up to 175 wat da hell u people make da crazies games n half of dem want work or adds pop up y'all need to do better
Unusable After 2 or 3 touches it overlaps I think 10 or more pictures and bugs out.
I can't switch between articles. The new update spoils the fun
BAD ARE YOU SEEIOUS EVERY TIME Y MOVE I LAG I CANT DO ANYTHING I WILL PUT 1 STQR AND DELETE
The screen keeps showing up blank blue When I try to open the game, it would load but kept ending up showing up blank blue screen. I had to clear my data and cache hoping for that to work but nothing works.  Please fix this asap
Please Fix Hello, please fix, Imagine is too slow in addition with original app insatgram. I am forced to stay in Iran.and im sure this is not for my internet speed.Thank you
Its stupid I thought that it was going to allow me to actually see lasers where I was bringing the camera without looking to the camera I thought I was actually going to be a laser thing but instead it was just stupid stupid
This game sucks. Will not load. Paid for this game. Would love to get my money back. Should have been fixed by now.
  
Don't waste your time Poor graphics and could not aim properly. I say it's not a game. Would have done minus rating if there would have been
Why is it so hard to pick a car to upgraded at garage PLEASE FIX IT Also lost my coins n gems after updated
Like but immortal giga needs to be fixed Yes I know it takes 24 kill shots to kill. I have done it on adventure but on survival I have hit them with 46 cob cannons and they won't die. Only die from the lawnmower. Never even throw their rider.
So so so bad I tried this app but just delete after install bcz it's so rabbis app
How can u judge from the  names of persons that they will have baby in their future r not Its fake..
It won't let me open the game 
False answers and no way to report it James Bonds middle name is M i don't think so silly game 
Baby wooden blocks I hate it but my baby brother love's it.
Can't check Please load my country South Africa,  in Gauteng so that I will be able to work with the app.
Why so many frequent updates
Updates are FAKE Was a good game. now its waste.. eating MB only. cheated by developers  Un installing..
Never connets to the Internet I have a strong internet connection. Stil it doesn't connect to the internrt except for the first time..fix this I will rate 5 stars
hated this game it was boring
Bakwas Adhuri kahani...
Won't even start I'm using the demo version and it works great..however this paid version is not working on my phone. Please fix
I have tried scaning things and it never works, the first time it took me almost 30 min to get it to read a qr code. Im gonna have to look for another scaner
Not what I had in mind The game looks fun but for the control to the  hill made the bus fall every time.
Boring ad version of a free game Doesn't even have the features of the original or QBASIC versions
Please refund Still has not refunded my money  is worse now than it was before I put pro on. It keeps locking up and going black.  I have an android. Samsung note 4 minutes
The last patch made it so it crashes when Google Play in game is enabled. That's about as amateur as it gets. Fix it already.
Premium version with ads. Complete waste of money... Paid for non ad and still get ads.
Its ver ver bad
App has some serious bugs I can't seem to submit answers, and all of the keyboards I use seriously malfunction specifically when using your app.
Cheap It's fun at first but when you get into it,it freezes my phone then I got to restart just cause it froze.. so f this game but I did enjoy part 1
Wonderful but boring I kind a like this game but it is boring and if you lose you will lost money and its hard to pick the right horse
Not opening This is very bad game I don't like it . When I open it from play store it returns to play store again again I open again returning what is this I will become mad I don't like this it is very bad very bad please fix
ITS BAD HATED IT This game sucks but its fun maybe add more to it makers maybe you don't have to unlock all the stuff still didn't like it and I'm 9 so maybe gust for people like my brother he's 5
GT S6802 Faltu game..
It's crashing Have purchased the full version and it was working all fine till yesterday....started crashing... unable to proceed once I click on resume please fix this soon'........ COULD YOU AT LEAST ARRANGE FOR A REFUND
Worst game ever in the world ... Can't download extra content , it stucks on 16 .... plz try to resolve 
Police scanner app really sucks The free version was better than the paid one So don't waist your money Police scanner app
Samsung Note 4 Bought this app sometime ago, was a great app. Loved it  Update giving it another try. Will see if the bugs have been fixed if so will give 5 stars again.NOPE STILL SUCKS Very disappointed.
Dont spend your money Game lags really bad. Other players can make moves while your doing your moves. Its a waste of money. It looses connection when trying get in on a table.
Keeps saying insufficient storage When I try to install this pro add on it fails saying there's insufficient storage, what gives Other apps install fine 
THE SECOND TIME I AM BUYING THIS APP AND I REALLY HOPE THIS TIME IT DOESN'T MYSTERIOUSLY DISSAPEAR FROM MY DEVICE IF I UPDATE os so that I have to PURCHASE it again and again
Help less and hope less. .. how come a person want to learn a new language will learn from the beginning Make some thing like english to arabic... then it will make some sense
Rubbish
No rider info or photos. No team rosters either.
Why Four different categories I didn't receive the 7 songs in 2.7 I have pictures to prove it lol but serious. Please fix this. It's not fair thanks
Can't play Every time I open the game and click the play button it shuts down. I uninstalled and reinstalled.. Same problem. Super disappointed 
Calls keep ending I can make and receive calls but they keep ending even though I have a strong wifi connection
The worst game ever It controls by itself I mean why to waste money on garbage
Tem no youtube de graca Baixe um aplicativo de video download e voce nao precisa pagar por cada video. E mais, vc pagando espera que nao tenha propaganda .... mas nao  isso que acontece .... Nao caiam nessa ...
Ehhhhhh Overall a good game but everytime i win with no lives lost so  7 meddalions it does not give me the win or the meddalions and its fustrating. Not to mention the hackers everywhere
The time on this widget is not auto update to get compatible with the phone time, I have to press on the  time area to update..
Kinda boring At first it was really fun, but then it got very boring, very fast. I thought it would be fun but I dont recommend this game unless your favorite thing is easy strategy.
Now with Ads  Because my toddler is really interested in speeding up my phone or fighting dragons Now he opens up google play when painting  Uninstalled.
No good on LG G3 after update to Android 5.0 This was a fun and addictive game until the update. Tried uninstalling and reinstalling but it still looked funky. Very bummed.
This piano made me Confused 
WHAT THE HELL EVERY TIME I TRY TO OPEN INSTEAD OF OPENING IT SAYS YMBAB IS NOT RESPONDING FIX OR GIVE ME A FULL REFUND
I'll give it five stars if the lag stops I cant even move
what uninstalling already bought the book to color in but to use the app I have to pay for it again I don't think so...now my kid is upset and so am i
Lameeee This game is garbage and sounds way different than my real piano
Ruined my life I started playing. Then I played some more, eventually getting addicted. I lost contact with all family and friends. Now I sit here in my dark room under  the blankets to protect me from the black demon gorillas. Thanks temple run...
ADS why this game still have ads I buy thia game with money
Solitare Why would anyone want to play this game with the stupid damned ads popping up in your face after every deal No thanks
Why  The game is wonderful but why do I have to buy all the other stuf. It going to be better if you give me all the other clothes and shoes. Careless
Wats wrong wid the slides Used to love this app bt now the slides are not loading. Please fix it
A I lack of trade ruins game play I offered 400k plus 2 properties for 1 property and still declined. Don't waste ur money
New update sucks This thing auto rotates and it auto updates my apps e.g Galaxy Wars in such a way that the app send me notifications but when I open to read what the notification was about, it's not there due to the ayto update
IT IS TOO BAD Bad
Doesn't work I downloaded this for my daughter and we can't get past the main screen.  Screen goes black then shuts down. Please fix
Was a good game Undone soldier update. And I will give you 5 star
Whatever This app is so dum because all the places are closed and you barley do anything
PLEASE HELP, STUCK Even with the update I STILL cant progress because i dont have enough red gems. Im gonna keep taking away stars till this is fixed. I paid money for me to not be able to progress.
My daughter loves the game but... Way too many pop up adverts. Every minute another one pops up. Uninstalled
Doesn't work half the time Would be better if worked And wish I could send via text Please fix
Great game BUT... Ads every time I open the menu and before I even get to play That's just ridiculous
Dumb When I die some stupid advertisement has to come up out of nowhere
Terrible Won't even let me play anymore
Good Game But ads for a game that costs money Ridiculous
I loved this game until I realized how this game does not payout.  It is the lamest slot game ever  Play this slot if you want to lose all of your money.
Don't download It will load up then when I try to do a tournement or a race it crashs an goes bk to my home screen on my phone dont download waste of time
ball Yeah is amazing
bad
Grown up section won't open What good is this app if i cannot open what I purchased Ridiculous
To much advertising and hang a lot How can any one play this game with unstoppable covering screen adds side adds and it also hangs to much stick cricket is far far better than this .
Team play only NEW RENEWED DISLIKE NOT CORRECTED I really wish you could choose team or individual play. Very hard to rate game when FORCED to play a version you don't favor.
It only gives me little very bubbles
App no good Got a new Holden and down loaded your crap app. Wont conect to car. Shame on you Holden . It wnot even work on the phone. Wtf
Horrible Slow loading times and horrible hitboxes
Never refreshes tweets My TL gets stuck regularly and won't refresh even wo the warning. Please fix.
Very annoyed I have been loving this game, I was addicted and I got really far into it and all if a sudden it has gone right back to the beginning. Not happy.  I'll delete now.
So dumb
Hate The game sucks you will never unlock new levels
Great Game  Horrible Lagging I love this game, but unfortunately the lagging and glitches are too irritating to keep on my tablet...  if they ever fixed this I'd definitely redownload it  play again
I can't even download the game I get to 90 then it finishes and I have to redownload it. Waste of money.
It made no sens
Critical bug Sometimes the game throws different questions to the opponents, so it doesn't make sense to compete anymore. I paid money for full version and now regret it. Devs aren't doing anything about it I want a refund
App version is 2.5 and i hided  images only. Like wallpapers, WhatsApp profile pics, share it app images etc
WHAT I downloaded it and it said could not find obb data.Like what the hell m8
older versions were better
Glitch I put one X down and I don't wait for him to do it because I accidentlly put it in a wrong place and click new and he goes twice or he goes three times and hee wins
Fix scanner please Everytime i try to take a pic of a card the sets wont download. Then i get an error message. Will five 5 stars when it works again
Actually love it but.. The game always freezes and the buttons to navigate the game doesn't work. Click one button to play and takes you to another screen. Galaxy Note 4.
Suck
Can't upgrade after already paid for I played and upgraded this game on my old phone, downloaded on my new phone and even though it says I already paid for it.... I can't upgrade. Almost feel like demanding a refund
Wrong songs The anthem you have for the UK is actually My Country Tis Of The from the US and the Star Spangled Banner seems to be a half an octave to a full octave off in some places
Worst football app ever Even the goalkeeper doesn't want to keep. He prefers to catch outside the 18 box. Sucks
Stupid I hate it because it is so so annoying and boring
Fuck It
Font size trouble a lot, make u blind
Can't install Played this game previously on my device.but now I'm unable to install this.every time it says could't install due to an error.fix it
Hated it Poor steering and I hope they change the game or I will be deleting the game and telling everyone in my family how or fall it is change it  
Money stealer I bought the whole app and then after playing and when I turned it off all of my beads stencils and excesories where gone uninstall
something's wrong with the app today. unable to load earlier tweets in lists. the load more doesn't load at all. please check and fix asap.
I did reinstall app But it still runs ridiculously slow. It takes the fun out of the game when you have to wait a minute between questions. Sometimes when it's time for akinator to guess, game just keeps processing forever. Disappointing.
Give me my money back I've played this game once. I've tried to play it about 10 times but I can only get so far before it force closes. Unacceptable for a paid game
Horrible Won't let me play as guest and there's no option to sign up. Went to website, signed up, then tried signing into game. Still didn't work.  Going to uninstall right now.
No rate One star is enough
Sucks Doesn't start. It's restarting every time i accessed the app
DON'T WASTE YOUR TIME LIKE I DID Took ages to download.... and after all that it won't connect to its own server and just says waiting to load assets then after about 5 minutes it decides to crash.
My daughter could not get the tools to pick up. So I tried and I got the tools to pick up but couldn't get the makeup to work
Not.work I.record but didn't work
Wont open 95 of forums You get a list of forums that I haven't heard of.  And most of them won't connect. . Very poor program. I WANT A REFUND
Hacked Over half my matches today were hacked. Players take no hits when 10 red moabs run through, and I cant play with non hackers I know because that aspect of the app just plain doesnt work
Block text Function disappeared after upgrade. Only block calls available.
Bad update No tables available. Says use the play now cube and that doesn't even work. Tables is lagging terribly. Game used to be fun and easy to play. Now it's more like a job just to play.
stopped working afer upgrade of android to 5.0
To old Jb me peda hua tha tb ki hai
bullshit i tried robbing a liqour store with the desert eagle but the cashier just laughed at me and called the cops. the cops called my parents bc im 12 years old and i got grounded for 2 months. realistic guns my ass 1star
I want a refund The game is so maganitzed I can't click on anything or play the game or reset the settings on the game So It doesn't work because it won't let me click anything
Not Bad This app doesn't have option to play other music
Not Working Android 5.1.1 App not working at all with Android 5.1.1. It would also be nice to have features such as Area Forecast. Please fix.
Do not download Its not even what it look like in the picture
developer It doesnt have any other settings.the coins dont add up and adds come up every 2 minutes
Sucks
Can't play My daughter can't play this game. She downloaded it and then she logged off she tried it again and again but she coudn't play please fix
Dosnt record everytime I have had many long conversations that should have been recorded but alas it only records 2 minutes off it. Some times it works. It's very hit and miss
Badtrip
I want a refund I sucks the computer version is better
Before it was working nice but now in Congo making call to India can't talk just connecting call after 3 second dropped. Please help.
Ok..... I played it be for and we'll it would not work it was frezzing all the time I hated it
what is this It was horrible i would rate a 0 if i could
Game Sucks Can't even build anything.  You just get constantly attacked from big guys and they wipe out your resources and army so you have to start over
Problems with ver 1.5 This updaite was disaster all roots have instaled with the priviuse ver disapeared the programe in ver 1.5 is unstable please revers the old pruven V.
Very bad after download you guys need money this is not fair at last provide some service to New members     very bad very bad and fake application  this is to inform all you that pls don't download this app
It doesn't work Very disapointed, would like refund. All characters and vehicles are purple and white pixles. It is unplayable Bought for my three year old son who is very upset he can't play doesn't understand why.
HTC Bug The needles rarely display.
MegaFreeze This game use to rock. I had to install and reinstall all day still no luck. I played first two dungeons and now I can't play. Should change name to when hell freezes over.
It's Terrible The graphics are terrible and you can't run the ball. When you get tackled it pushes you back 5 yards. If you want a good football app play Madden Mobile.
Highres incompatible Great game, but not compatible with highres devices. Practically unplayable on my G3 with 2550x1440. Shame
Does not work Just black screen I will be getting a refund
Ok lng din nmn
Supriya Goats
Sucks Royally Impossible to play. Google pop ups for their other games cause it to freeze every two minutes uninstalling
Downloaded it but failed to open. Just says the app stopped working. Wish I could give it a zero rating...poor
This app sucks Should just be taken down
Not compatible Doesn't respond to touch controls on the Galaxy tab 37.0. I'll update my review if and when they fix the problem.
Crashes every time I receive a foul fate or wound token
Too many ads that too in the game
Double pinning fix Edited You've had three weeks to fix the double pinning issue and didn't. I love pinterest but I hate that you've taken away this feature.
Good
Update lost my saved game This game sucks Spend time to play the game and it lost my progress. Don't waste time
Couldn't get local police This app is rubbish you can't get your local police station doesn't give you a manual scanning optionProbably not even digital.
Doesnt save I bought the game and i was fun and all but then the game kept on putting me back levels. So i have to keep playing it over and over again which is soo annoying. Wouldnt have bought this game if i knew this was gonna happen
Destroyed the app The latest updates to Snapchat have made this app horrible. It drains battery, snaps keep failing to send even with perfect signal and it's just glitchy. Needs a big fix
Broken Randomly doesn't remove the letters you've selected from the bottom list and some of the puzzles are not solvable because they don't have the necessary letters to solve.
Shit I  using the same dam phone same dam Sim. But it keeps saying INVALID DEVICE ID... DO SOMETHING... How many times do i have to uninstall and install
Gone to crap. Ad after ad after ad after ad. You can't tell me the money hasn't went to head.  Game now freezes and lags.  I'm on the new note 4. No excuses.
Very disappointed I am disappointed I see pictures of Sun and clouds and snow in the description on the Play Store. When I install it on my phone it is clear transparent no beautiful picture
LOL  No News about International Matches
I can't get it to work on my lg g2 Black screen
Scores keep crashing and can't register for the community.
Hello I HAVENT BEEN ABLE TO PLAY NOT EVEN ONE GAME AFTER THE TITTLE SCREEN OF ANY GAME IT BLACKS OUT PLEASE FIX IT AND ILL LEAVE A GOOD REVIEW
I love it I love I it
Crap Extremely limited selection most big name mangas not available at all. Format sucks. Just not worth installing
Disappointed Enjoyed the game for a month and then it said carnt connect to google services even tho I had full internet signal so I sacked it ..
Waste I threw 4.30 in the bin. This game is rubbish in the bin. Asoulute RUBBISH
Keeps freezing my phone Crap. Too many adverts
Doesnt work Doesnt work.  Startup screen only.  Galaxy s3
The game keeps freezing up. The 4th roll option does not go into the ad part and then i have to discard game cause it thinks it is there but not
Waste of time There is some problem in this game . Dont download its not opening .
Won't install I have tried to install this game on my samsung galaxy tab 3  but after getting to about 90 it gives me an error message and fails.  Very disappointed as I have paid for the game and was looking forward to playing it.
Lazy port Wish i could get my money back, lazy port. Can't play without WiFi why it could have been done so much better Such a classic
awesome until So this game is great. Don't get me wrong. However, it keeps starting me back at level 79 when I start it, regardless of how far beyond it I advance. Not cool. Otherwise it's a good game, great way to pass some time.
Can't use my other mods I can no longer use my other mods it used to work but now it doesn't. Fix this and you get 5 stars
Very bad app only few states are given.
Classic game ruined by port Needs WiFi or data to play.   I got this game to play on my morning commute. But it appears I just wasted my money on a crippled single player player game that needs Internet to work.
Used to be great Was the best if not all that realistic cricket game but is now blocky, laggy, slow and freezes all the time, especially when the AI is about to bowl, making timing impossible. A great shame.
Game sucks. When you make a table for easy, fun play and you aren't a 'pro', you end up with a 'shark' as an opponent
Why                                                                every thing is locked exept the bracelets plus i had a few of crayola apps they were good but not amazing...so disapointed ... plz fix it
Wast.not at all good .shows nothing abt location of cabs .can't book cab with this easily will not give any information
I HATE this game I Haaaaaaaaaaaaate it I like it and all but... a bunch of adds all ways pop up. And it will NOT work I try to do what it says. It doesn't work uninstalling
Thank you I am not happy....went from 1.5 billion to 400 million because it freezes, won't let you leave, n misappropriates pots I've lost a lot of chips n I'm about to lose this app.
Was my fav...not anymore Can't play by myself  hate the look. Changed phone so had to update. Didn't think it was the right game. Used to play for hours  now am ready to uninstall.
Waste of time Take too long u have to tap twice. This game has too many ads poping up at the bottom with blinking lights
Hate it the most The most pointless game I have ever seen...also so idiot game I can't believe what are that creator did...I uninstalled the game when I just realized it.                                                     Very very very bad
Trim stopped working I have been using this app for 1 month. after the new release installed trim stopped working. gives a memory error. Tried rebolting phone. No luck. Right now worthless on galaxy s2.
Not enough info, you still have to go online I'm just irritable right now this app is almost a waste.
5 star down to 2 star International match should give priorty.
It is fun but one problem The first thing is that u only get 2 unlocked things why don't they unlock everything for u this goes to all the other game s they make
not working original weather at Islamabad Pakistan is 32C and that app showing 42C.plz fix that issue otherwise that's means its Pre feeded data in that App.plz dont download it.its wastage of money.
Not working I am using samsung galaxy fame s6810p and it s not loading please fix uninstalling
Useless No options for settings, annoying good bye every time you go back to the main menu, substandard graphics. Found nothing to like Glad I got a refund.
At level 4 the bus keep turning over and when u restart it , it does the same thing but other than that it ok
Doesn't save bikes to fb Does not save tournament bikes or single player stats to your Facebook account so when you reinstall on a new phone you lose everything. This is a great game, but I will not be reearning my 2 and 3 star bikes.
Give back the 1 touch move. You make it bad by add 2 touch to move. Feel not right
So so Only shows a handful of current buzzes then shows stuff that's over a year old, doesn't post pics at the best of times and is just down right annoying. Apart from those really annoying parts it's good for a laugh with crazy people
Fuck fuck assshole didn't ever seen mcent Otha holy fuck says blocked your child night fuck
Games are too tight, big money eater had 4 months don't get better I'm deleting the game
Not good at all Almost all the keys don't work the piano this sounds nothing like a piano
Worst then Worst It is the worst game I've ever played
Poorly made The content iself is good, but the app has a terrible UI, and is easily the laggiest app I have used. Lag on a top of the line device like mine is completely unacceptable.
Very boring
Message delivered after 12 hrs The messages i sent from the app was delivered 12 hrs later,messages sent to different Mobile operatorspls fix this. And also there are just too many ads
Galaxy grand prime It started very fun for the first month, but then it started to lag and a lot of ads Kept popping out, fix this issue and I'll give 5 stars        PLEASE    FIX
Its sucks
Not fair I do anything. When I click on the sesons it tresses on me. I give it 5 stars if you fix it
R u making us Fool  This app decreasing brand value of all cab services. Yesterday I cross checked ur data with all cab apps.. All data is fake..Pls dont waste time of people for ur profit..
Black screen on my Nvidia Shield. Runs on Galaxy Note 3 but low blocky graphics..Fix the black screen on loading issue. You claim to be Tegra optimized but doesn't even run on Nvidia shield
Noooooo refund
Cake maker kid 1a
Ads Get the bloody ad out of game or get the game out of play store
Suck Have to unlock with gem, which I just use it one time on first level. So it is suck
Totally inaccurate The Norwegian weather app YR is way more accurate then these guys or BOM themselves. 90 chance of being wrong with their forecasts
It is not a game. I thought it was.
Wow, just wow. I have hardly been able to play since I got my S3 over two years ago due to bugs, now that I have a note 4, guess what It still crashes and is unplayable fun game on pc, but a waste of money and time on your phone.
Fake options I tried turning off notifications more than 5 times and I still get them twice a day on an s5 I'm not going to loose my job because of some stupid game popping up in the middle of the day deleted what a waste
Crap game ,makes no sense . so Manny retard games out there its a shame bye unistalll
Though it would be fun The rollet decide waht move we will get and in turns
Not accurate Give warnings of maybe off, than the power is already off. Sometimes it shows no load shedding than we sit in the dark. It was spot on for Nelspruit, but now it is not even close.
Fix the bugs, didn't pay for a buggy app 
Disappointed I play sims 3 on the pc .. so was hoping it would  be similar,  cant have babies and by the looks of things cant even get married cant get past best  friends ... Waste of money 
Not able to play real chips....if acc having real chips
Froz When i went to take out the fire the game froz and stopped please fix 4 
Bad game Itss show for wireless conection ....whats is its mean
So I paid for crap As awesome as the app was, your updates ruined it, you update it too frequently, now it freezes not until I restart phone. TRASH 
Tmo upsell This stopped working a while back on T Mobile. only a UA hack may work...
Since the update the game is broken Match making is not working five stars when this bug is sorted, but still an amazing game love it so addictive
Fake Fake Fake I am installed this app and i am opening but it is show your account is blocked ..      way my account is blocked  and i am download this. on my device fast but it is blocked show  it is a fake app no time vest friends
Sadness Like this game a lot but for some reason it couldn't download on my device
Aviary effects woodland I've purchase it and it won't let me apply it am I doing something wrong 
I stuck at level 7 grrrrrr
Don't download App won't let you put towers on the bottom row. Makes two of the levels impossible to beat and the others more difficult. Please fix this. If not I want my 2 back
Does not work It freezes. It does not work on my galaxy tab 2, neither my galaxy S5. Big disappointment. Fix it please.
Wort game Every yime i lose it always does an advert and the steering wheel is horrable
Confused app After installing it says to download new app. Once I click, it says this app is not available in your country....
Wolf crap Doesn't  pay what ever bet. Yer heaps little wins. Often wins smaller than smallest bet. Played for 5 minutes ready to uninstall.
Sis My sister loves this she evens sings it in the car lovvvves it. Let it go is annoying I like frozen its just the let it go part 
Time waste
It's the worst You think your playing the song but when you tape any place your not playing the song
Playing its a really feeling good time pass for me but its needs to get improve  the stages...
0star option not there..... Bad app. APP KE NAM PE DHABBA HE YE
In comparison to the iOS version it's lame. Awful implementation hopefully you don't get a chance to see what a great job they did on the iOS version and what a hack job the slapped onto the Android platform.
Hate it
Doesnt work I just installed onto my S5. My id no is not accepted in the application...
Don't waste your money If you have a galaxy phone do not buy this game. It's been two months and no update to fix this. Just crashes everytime I open it.
Loadshedding not on scheduled time
Not loading I downloaded this on my kobo arc and it is not loading when I press play. All other apps are fine. It is just this. It sucks because I'm a huge Queen fan. Please help.
So freaking boring Need more stuff like stop parking twice then end like add more stuff
Updated to the new app .. had all my notifications on .. like always. ..  the no update on this app made me miss the quick strike retro 7 Bordeaux Tshirt . Was not pleased.....  so new app needs some work 
 I really love this game, but I've been having issues with it. I have bought some gems and I get the charge in my credit card but my gems never appear on the game.... I hope someone can really help me with this issue...Thanks
Never get this game Worst. This game won't let me click any thing I think it is a peice of crap       NEVER GET THIS GAME
Stupid It shold go in the bin
Sucks I did not get to do it the game was not working then I got it to work and it sucked
No funciona Aplicativo no funciona no S3
Rated once 5 stars... continues to ask me so now I will continue to rate it 1 star. leave me alone and let me play the game if someone rates you then then they  shouldn't be asked to do it over and over and over again...
Very boring Without better controls and display
Lots of fun, but... Too many annoying bugs that prevent the game from playing. I'd be happy to submit screenshots andor explain the bugs, but there is no way to submit feedback through the game.
      .  . Gyroscope does not work properly on Samsung Tab S. The aim moves to the left instead up. Its unreal to play. Fix it please or give money back.
Needs Fixing App closes immediately after opening it.
Freezes I think my son would like this app I hope so since I paid for it, but I don't know because it freezes so much.
DON'T GET IT I wish I could have given it no stars but then I would be able to write this so yeah. It's STUPID DON'T GET IT. YOU HAVE BEEN WARNED.
Disliked this app The manga's are very short,I dislike the fact that you can't search a manga at all.
Great but buggy There is a bug that causes the net in the gym to fall off and that is really a problem considering I just wasted 5000 coins to get it. Five stars if you fix that though
rubbish dont bother wasting your time
Ughhhhhhh Wow just bought the game and says device not supported ........ HELP WHAT DO I DO
Irritating I love wof, but this app is extremely irritating. I've had to turn it off and back on 20 times and I still can't get or to play a level all the way through without messing up.
Crazy helium video booth Disappointed that I can't share via text and I don't have the same selections as people with an iPhone.
Can it improve Please add different places to drive like offroad and many more. Tired of driving it into one direction. And also the mission like going to the airport. And free roam,  the roads are just straight.....
Bad When I play the game it does not even have the right letters. For example, discovery channel it had the y in the picture , but not in the letter section
H Keep on getting license check error every time I open the game. Would give a higher rating if this was fixed.
Bakwasssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssss It does not work on my phone
Garbage An advertisement for every button you press.
Booooooo for you if you like this This game is so bad that it shouldn't even be on the play store.
Horrible update I use Samsung galaxy 3. Post last updated it has become super  slow . I can't go back to contact and many more bug appeared. Till now I was fan of this app and always gave 5
Stop using your queen so early and only to trade queens
Will this thing be updated
Fk There is no option otherwise I will not give a single star to this game
don't waste your money Closest feed is 4 county's away and the ones they do have seem to never work when you need them
No skipps If you dont know the product you cant go in to the next one and thats bad because their were a few that I've never seen in stores
Dunno It's freezing on you so times I'm warning you not to download that
boring...really... u'll know how i feel when your level high enough...
Rubbish This game would be ok if you could play it and the game did not play for you had it 4 min and got rid of it sort it out
Terrible The makerover screen is barley even the after playing a puzzle it just shuts off don't get this game if I could put zero stars I would
Does what it says Nothing more except adds
Ruined a good game. Update added full screen ads even with continuos play. Ruined a perfectly good game. Uninstalling and moving on.
Ekk Not much to do for free lots of pop ups for the kids to click on 
Waste Do not pay for this I should've listened to the other reviews. My 2.5 year old completed in 5 minutes and then its game over......waste of money
No add please. Give more add in between and you will lose your rating.
Huge Bug When someone replies to my comment, I go to it. I want to see the other replies, so I hit more replies. It never loads them, it only loads the most recent one.
Poor performance Incredibly or performance on my Galaxy Note 4.also fails to go full screen status bar covers top of game.
Shenika Martin My two year old son loves this game
Little slow and buggy I've got the other Daniel game and it is OK. This one is a little slow and I have to figure out where it stores all the pictures and how to clean it up. About half the videos cause it to Force Close too.
This is a bomb I hate this game. Plz fix it. I will never ever and my whole life download tis game again
Battery vampire LG G3. Ever since Android 5, battery life sucks. Facebook keeps running no matter what I do or don't do. Removed Facebook and reboot, battery life back to 200 hours from lucky if it lasts all day.
Bad Worst game I have ever played...don't understand a thing.... your introduction for the new players are the worst I have ever seen
Was fun My daughter loved this. Then there was an update   now it doesn't load.
Nice
Can't play Everything large like zoomed in So can't play  Please fix
Sucks bad. Play flick shoot. Its a lot better than this. this game lags to bad. And still hasnt refunded me my 5,000 mp
Fuck off ..... Waste of time  Whenever my network error its shows opponent wins. ...it doesn't wait 30 seconds for my network .....bullshit app
App doesn't open.  Please fix or refund.  Thanks
Will not open I used to love this game until now it will not open. It is getting uninstalled from me phone.
Shutting down I paid money to play this game and I expect to be able to play it. Not just keep it on my tablet waiting for it to work. Fix it or I will get my money refunded back to me
Fk you
Very poor app. No kids,  no promotions, very limited character customizations, and crashes every few minutes.  Sucks.
Worse after updating The app is too lag after the new updates. Watch video does not work at all. Please do something about it.
In my opinion,this game comes pretty close to being the MOST HORRIBLE game EVER invented and VERY VERY SURPRISINGLY, Temple run 2 is WAY BETTER       
Samsung Galaxy Grand Prime After New Update It Has Been Freezing So Much  I Can't Press The Go Back Button Because All I Get Is  A Black Screen . I Have To Close Then Reopen Just To Continue To Play And I Love This App  Please Fix
I want my money back Doesnt work, dont buy
This game cheats you on points especially when doing multiple flips on downhill board adds up 1000  points per flip on the the screen but you may only get the points for 3 or 4 of them out of 10 or 15
App not opening anymore  The second day after installation it's not opening anymore stuck on the bricked screen with the picture of a plane.
Worst app Not of use.  Waste of time dont install
Does not work on Android 5.1 Stay away from this if you're device is running Android 5.1 or higher, it does not load up. The developer failed to address this in the update.     Works on my other device that runs on Android 4.4.4
Problems. When I broadcast the chat on screen isn't in my own room. When I search for a hashtag broadcast it loads the first room only and won't let me choose who to watch.
Totally fake and full of ads. Please dont waste your time, i removed it.
Puffballs United is getting old I've have play BREAK THE PRISON, STEELING THE DIAMOND, AND INFLATED THE AIRSHIP. But PUFFBALLS UNITED is boring
Dont like the log in I have install this game today yet i cant creat my own id... its says that cant creat more id but this is the first time im going to play this game, it really suck specially when i want this game so badly
Whats happening My sims game wont even start it just says unfortunatly Freeplay has stopped and wont let me log in face book it just goes to a blank black screen fix and ill rate 5 s garrented
Worth it This game is quite fun. Worth the money i spent
Boring It was boring u don't really do anything  reccomend minecraft pe thoe.
Annoying how comes since I put money on I can't seem to get a decent winning hand.. people always call all in with nothing then win on the last card...totally fixed rubbish
To many ads They pop up everytime my lil sister tries to play music
Couldn't even open the app Really
THIS APP IS HORRIBLE DO NOT GET IT IT KEEPS PAUSING AND WHEN I HIT THE NEXT BUTTON AND IT GLITCHES
English please it so good with many comic but how can't i understand it.
Used to be better For a free app this was pretty good but recently it has started to regularly show my speed as 0 mph intermittently then after a while it freezes completely until I exit and restart the app. Can't do that while driving
Not working it is fack app
Fucking Usually i hate lies.. But this is so disgusting... Damide
I would not recommend this app because it has too many pop ups, too many advertisements and you can't read the story because of the pop ups Horrible app
quite nice but corrupt images on android tv box seems quite good, but unuseable sadly on my drako aw80 box
Fun Games Ok
After payment download won't complete Either fix the bug or give me my money back. Download gets to 180 mb then I get an error everytime.
Failure. Took my money and won't let me download the app. Refund not available.
Crashing Loved it when it first got it but now it crashes I'd loved it fix soon I need I'd love to use it
It didn't work
Hated it Aweful     .......period
Fail to work Cant work on my smart phone y220
Special features don't work I have the free version works great, then downloaded the premium version and can't import or make suggestions to work. Galaxy 5 don't buy.
Wawa It does not work every time I log in I couldn't play it log out to my homescreen
Golf Maybe I keep tuning in at the wrong times, but do they actually show golf on the Live cast. All I see is interviews and interest pieces.
Hate it for latest version I have installed the game but when I open it it says an error its a nice good Graphics I'll five stars if it would play in my mobile and I am using micromax canvas juice A177
Won't work This app used to work, now Wont eve. Load really annoying. Sort it out
Data Eater I been using this app and yesterday i found that it consumed my 500mb of data....how is it possible that a chatting app eat that much data 
About this game This game is very nice.
Can't access details of historic runs Crashes every time I try to go back and look at details of previous runs. Using Samsung s6
This game gets 5 stars but... I bought riptide 2 and was never able to download it. The credit card was charged but I can't get the game..bullcrap
OMG never get and do  not  play single player on normal gt he just keeps on scoring  makes me mad  do not get it 
Crashes every time I open it. Unstable and unusable Waste of money and time Uninstalling and going to Falcon.
im not moving anything I didnt touch anything and the timer started going and it gave me up to 100 moves this is stupid.
I liked it at first then when I paid for more coins it did not give them if it's not fixed it will be uninstalled
I not really into it because there's not that much fighting bad guys
Word streak w friends Used to be soooooo much better . The new upgrade sucks  Aren't upgrades supposed to be better   Please fix it and and at least give users a option to choose which version they want to play
Rip off I paid for some coins and never received them. So I emailed them, and still nothing. Not even a reply.
Very bad I'll give 2 starts because the program seems to be good but I cant even drag to play and it log me off at all time. Very terrible I was gonna pay the monthly payment for this app but I gonna go ahead and cancel it
Don't waste money It sucks every thing is bad and glitchy do not buy
I. Love.  It Kop
The worst of mobile gaming practices Incessant notifications, meaningless social integration requests, rampant inapp purchases. Simply having this game installed is far more annoying than any fun you'd have playing it.
Castle Wonders Hidden Object..Got rid of it IT kept freezing up. A real pain 
Love the moth, but the app is trash Crashes and hangs frequently  just about unusable a lot of the time.  Interface is confusing too.  Love the Moth, wish the app actually worked.
The app itself is not bad...but the font size keeps getting very small...and constant ads interrupting approx every 3 levels...to annoying
DO NOT DOWNLOAD ULESS YOU WANT TO PAY REAL MONEY It is AWFUL I Don't Think Anyone Should Get It It won't let you make a necklace, earings Or a head band Do Not Get
Bakwas Wanted to connect to Internet to play games of different types
Waste downloading not gud and its asking for purchase another game
Ok. Average Smooth, no issues. Not very exciting though, give me some more interesting tables please. Maybe better jackpot options would be good as it gets a little repetitive. Not bad though.
Bosan Permainan yg sangat bosan
SamandNick The game was way to short and there really wasn't a challenge.
 I am downloading this for an upcoming trip... I can't really rate the app before ever trying it, but the system insists I rate it Maybe I would give it a higher rating, if I was actually able to use it first
Doesn't work Doesn't work at all
samsang note3 It does not work I tried Panasonic and Tedelex so the problem is not my phone its this remote coz I have installed a decoderpvr remote and it works just fine.
Toooooo maaannnyyy adverts Geez cant even play for 10 seconds and an add pops up Uninstalled
Was perfect Now will not download comics...
Program not licensed shutting down. Can not get past main menu. Please update. The game is great but I have been waiting for an update for a while now. Please fix.
Not cool It uninstalled my mincraft pocket edition and it wants me to perches it again and I can't by it again because I don't want to risk losing it again so I don't recommend getting it if Ur going to put a skin on mincraft pocket edition
Not happy Wont let me pick my letters they are just blurred out 
Awful Just updated the game  today and lost all my progress. I had 4 different riders all at level 30. Sort it out
There is no search option. I have to scroll through all the cars to find what I want.
Doesnt work Total rip of when you click on the app the screen turns black i will rate 5 stars if you fix this
It installed but will NOT open my son and daughter in law both play and her phone is same as mine
Dstv.Drama and action Movies Martin LAwRENcE.50shades of grey
Could love it but... I hate having to download two additional apps just to make this app work.
Freeze at the Blizzard Icon. After the update it's frezze everytime at the blizzard logo. Please fix that. I have a Samsung galaxy S5. I rate 5 stars if I can play.
Its really impossible to make 200 runs in 10 overs its really a damn shit....should increase overs wud have given 5stars
Waste of time and money The city selection is the worst I have ever seen.  They do not even have Atlanta No cities within even 100 miles of me
This game scares me bc every time I play it, it has a code that says it's weird and scary. It says it cannot play due to this error.
Ok Don't waste your money just for this it glitches and doesn't let you turn when you move your finger don't buy it
Meh It only takes you like 3 days to complete the whole game and the story is so short but free roaming is the best. The cost is way too expensive and the story is ok. But I can't restore my save which Is bs
Location Where can i set my locations..  This is so unintuitive
No sound No sound.
Bad game When i must land safely, guide the mine, and close the door, i always win in the first time, but when second time i always lose. I will give you 5 star of you fix it
Not working It crashes just before i start a game and quits the game
Cool.....but It is an very cool game but you have to buy the rest of the game. You only get 2 dresses,and you can't put on an tale. Do not download it is an waist of time And if you do download it,you are making an VERY BIG mistake,I promise you 
No station The closest station to me is a 2 12 hour drive from where I live. Wish I could have done a search before paying for this. What a waste of money. I live right by the capital of my state too. Why do they not have a station
Chill If you know what the weather is then download it
Sucks royally It wouldn't even let it load for my daughter to play once. it kept shutting down on us. And at every turn possible there pop up ads.
Should be 5 stars Want more stages.... 
Not working I want this app to work but I can't get pass the start menu
Help I bought it yesterday an it wouldnt open, i have uninstalled it an reinstalled it. It still isnt opening
Can't export   so there's no meaning on art working... Please add the feature of exporting art work to standard format JPEG or PNG....... Then you can get 5 Stars. Without this feature this app has no value.
This does not teach anything This game had potential but as it is, it is no good. The tasks have no educational value
Unfortunately stopped Not at all opening in my Samsung galaxy note 3 ......... unfortunately stopped is displayed  by pressing on the icon of the app
 
Meh. Shoddy port.  No controller support.  Pressing home button causes game to restart.  Even the icons are low res
Garbage Lame low quality garbage.
Bad customer service, glitchy payment system While I enjoy the game somewhat, the payment system and glitches make this freemium game unreliable. If the game had tweaks here and there, it would be great.  Unfortunately,  the problems persist.
6 teams NOT I drafted 6 teams that's 6 leagues then when I want to add a player in league 3 it goes back to league 1 everytime fix this and I would love it if not back to cbs app I go
Very cool app but for some reason my phone keeps getting a black screen when I try coming back from sleep mode. Started happening after I installed this. Hope there is a fix.
Baccho ka video game.. plz dont b fooled..
Really seems cool, but... I'm stuck with the same elements and can't make anything else. I've tried all the combinations I have which are only 4 with their branch offs, and none of them create anything new. Sucks.
In starting it was ok..but at level 16 u can not complete d level due to different colors of balls. So i dont waste my tym on dis..nd i uninstall it..
Why Game doesn't work correctly on galaxy s3.wish they would tell you that.butt. h oles
Love the game I'm at level 96 on my tablet  I downloaded it to my phone  it starts me at level 1.   
Robtop doesn't help. I changed my name and it had an underscore in it so I can't log in and save my stuff. I've sent emails and haven't gotten replies. I'll rate 5 if I can change my name once more.
Very bad Not cover titwala which 10km from kalyan on kasara route
Useless Can't change CPU beyond 200mhz and 1200mhz on my S2. Even when adding a custom text file, and I set it to overclocked numbers, it never goes past 1200. I can already do all this in the settings menu of the device. This app has no use.
Fake Not like other dating services.its more like a porn site.where u video chat with them.not worth it.if u look for real love.
Very bad Ya it's really slow and not so gud stories
Forum Won't allow me to put my favorite forum in,  and its not on the list,  only reason I downloaded it... Any support for this
Can't load image try later Just started playing and 2 slots that I opened after lvling won't download Why would I want to be stuck playing a low level slot Fix ur issues and I will change my rating, as for now I can't even play.
Really bad now Used Navfree loads with no problem. Now its 'upgraded' to Navmii it won't worked. Needed it few days ago when lost  crash n closed Just tried at home n same again. Not worth the memory usage
Terrible Everytime you do a time challenge, you can never get three bolts.
It doesn't have the type of things I really enjoy reading.
It is not let me play my game let me the game last night just want my money
Worst game in this world This game Complete rubies, don't play this if you play this you lost your time
It charges automatically This app charges after using it for so long and I can't figure out how to cancel it
Mess Designed 4 computer 2 win 80 of d time
ESPN is terrible You are crazy If you think Bruce Jenner is courageous. A veteran who lost his legs and now has moved on and is accomplished is courageous. ESPN is a joke. Deleting this app.
Not happy Ok got and paid today and can't Evan get passed the start screen I keep getting an error marmalade or something like that  IS THERE GOING TO BE AN UPDATE OF THIS AS FROM THE DAY I PAID FOR THIS I STILL CAN'T PLAY I WON'T A REFUND ASAP
How the fuck do I turn off annoying daily reminders and popup advertisements
I hate it It is honorable I hate it I hate it I hate it ...   
It was awesome New version won't down load all the way and I am very mad I've been playing along time
Good game .....tech proz
No free tokens I downloaded flipkart but havent received 300 tokens. I wasted my mbs just for tokens.
it sucks it wont let me turn
Worst Keys r not feather touch. Sound is good. Other than that everything is worst. Very disappointed.
Good but lacking Good, but why cant we have the full lego star wars complete saga console game that apple devices have 
Very very bad. Chutiya game.       Very very 3rd class game. Data loss  time loss. Not work even onj 4G. Very bad developer, not develop properly.
They don't let you make enough coins to get the bows ...they force you to spend money ....total rip off
Too slow and laggy Used to be great, but will be giving it a miss now as it's too slow.
Issue The app is good but tournament is not opening.. I tried to open tri nation tournament but after selecting one team as your team it does not go ahead..
Oh Can I like have my money back Its very laggy and the controls are pretty bad...
When I want to play a game it always freezes when it halfway done and this is why nobody else likes it I think I did not read all the comments
i loved this game in my nintendo but it doesn't work Does not open in my asus fonepad
Edit course Mountain Crest,  Las vegas is my home course and the scoring needs to be edited. It be nice if we could edit the scoring.
Thieves Don't download Bought 15.00 worth of coins , never registered in my game, sure as hell took my money. You filthy thieves
Missing character Its really frustrating, after countless hours ive spent with this game my character suddenly disappeared. Fix this problem please.
Moron Every Game...and I do mean EVERY Someone gets the 64...55...6663...some money rock right off the rip Your game is BS and I call you on it
Gameplay is laggy. Too many laagy gameplay even in high end android device.works super smooth in Low end windows phone.fix issues fast.
Still doesn't work. Attempted fix, and I still am unable to retrieve my old save data.
Not very impressive Boring story and dull gameplay. Really wanted it to be better, but at this point, it's just not enjoyable.
          .        .    .     .         
Bootleg Fruit Ninja This game should be used as a punishment. Get ready for an arm workout. NOT FUN LAME I'd  give 5 stars for sucking if that were an option. Thank you and goodnight  Deleting
Espy Award Disgraceful... done with ESPN Uninstalled
Unbelieveable Since the game got the multiplayer online racing,.. The race are not fair enough,. The head start also are different within 5 second late.. The cost to repair the car also expensive.. Please improvise the unequality. 
If you run out of ammo and have no money You cant play the gsme no eay to earn money without missions and you need guns for that si kinda unplayable
Crap Can't list any cars due to there low mileage requirements...Un installed an deleted. Prices for cars are also higher than what budget charges.
Good game. Evilhorrible developer. Space hogger I'm sitting at 596mb with this in my storage I think it's due to the 1 million video ads downloaded. Also it crashes a shTload especially on startup. It's very heavy on resources.
Cannot Retrieve Seating Layout Brilliant app. But it's pointless if you cannot book tickets through it. I keep getting stuck at choosing seats. Fix this bug and I will rate it 5 stars.
How can you get your money back This game lags so bad that I can't even play it
So buggy, wonder how this app got through QA. Huge fan of TAL though. Will always look for updates and hope this matures.
Getting load icon...that's it
Does not work on HTC One M5 Purchased and always crashes after title screen. Waited to rate until a few updates still does not work.
Jams. Always Please do something about this. My samsung note 3 seems to ALWAYS jam on my 3 or 4 sortie. Please do not download unless you intend to get pissed real fast
Very Difficult to play it's very bad game bcz they can out you without any wrong move even you make a perfect shot.
I wish I could sue you U stole all my money with the skateparks and sht and now the whole game collapsed and doesn't even work... Thanks alot asholes
Constant force stops Samsung Galaxy 5 with Lollipop.  Game is now unplayable,  constantly stops force stop. Tried to reinstall, but still doesn't work.
Worst login option ever If you try to login 1000 times that time you gona b succeed...enter anything even if it is correct it shows an error of use this and that characters... I m very much disappointed by login page in app . please fix it
Unable to use Downloaded for plane ride as it says it has offline capabilities. Would not open past the entry screen in airplane mode. galaxy S5.
Not much to it. Only two songs and explains nothing.
The game kept on bugging out before I could even do route 1 on Los Angeles. This game is poor to play on any Sony Xperia phones especially the E1 so I am uninstalling this AS SOON AS POSSIBLE. I'm disappointed
Not teachable This teaches nothing if you press the wrong key it does it for you. please fix thx.
Great game n addicting . . . Please allow player to install or uninstall the vehicle upgrade.  Because sometimes maxed out  vehicle doesn't make it best on some area   stage . . .  Overall, Thanx
HATE IT  1You can't see any control's  on the day pad 2every time I try to create a game my whole system  RETARDED . AND RETARDED REDOWNLADING DOSE NO EFFECT 
Kamruzzaman Manik
TERRIBLE The notes are not labeled right, and dont sound right
nice app easy to use work good
Trouble Brewing Either BR did an update or certain feeds have a 'pseudoadware' type of deal. A bubble offering 'trending apps' keeps appearing. Some clarification would be nice.
1 Rating Only I Like this game but after Thomas Played Other Engines can not Unlocked.. Or I have to buy it... If You can fix it then Only I Love to Play it.. Or I have many option for Game Playing...
Not be open what's problem
Boooooooooooo Horrible dont install eeeeeeeeeeevvvvvvvvvvveeeeeeerrrrrrrrrrr
Bulok
Banyak iklan no good Hilang mood nk terus main
Disappointed  There only a collection of YouTube videos to watch, which don't even work I could easily just go on YouTube and watch Mark Crilly without having to get the trouble of video's not working '
It lags It doesn't let me swipe over fix this and I'll give 5 stars but for now I wish I could give this a zero
      
Who made this  After paying for the updates and maps it now says I haven't. Money well spent there... not.  Avoid this app like the plague
Privacy issues. Prices of reports should be shown upfront before asking for personal details.
Koneksi tidak stabil... Buka manga server tdk ke deteksi, buka youtube lancar aj. Koneksi speed 2mb tidak bisa utk mmbuka komik 
Sucks I played this game for like three minutes and then it stops and it doesn't do that on my other games. I gave it one star so I could rate it, not because it deserves it.
Hate You are right Annabel aviles . I mean why is all the good stuff locked No one is stupid enough to pay that much money. I hate all tutotoons games that is why I have none
Crashes I purchased this app and click it to play it for my son, it goes black n back to my home screen, I tried reinstalling and it still crashes Have a very sad n confused 3 year old
It's okay. Barely gives me any likes Fix please.
Where is the BUY option Some people want everything free. I HATE Adds and would be happy to pay the asking price just to be rid of the endless commercials. Just let me buy your app.
Keeps crashingnexus 5 Won't work for my nexus its shut down every time I've tried to play the first mission
Men. Its OK.But I would like it more if I could get the other animals easier, or someone told me how to get them.
Doesn't work They say it's compatible with Verizon fios, which a big fat lie.
No good Too many bugs.  Some puzzles can not be solved.  Paid for nonad version.  Sorry I did because will be deleting game
bakwas hai bil kul faltu muje english nahi aati hai so ye to bil kul faltu
One star only because I had to. I was super excited to try it on my new phone note 3 and all it does is force close . I haven't even seen the opening screen.  Fix it  I'll come back and check again soon  Getting rid of it again 
Bus tracker poor. Tracker doesn't update quickly, if at all. I advise you don't wait at home confidently using this as a guide. The map is also very slow. There had to be a better way...
Still waiting on bug fix It keeps crashing when i close after each time i play and i need to re install every time. This has been going on for literally over 3 MONTHS now. Not happy. Please fix
Can't find destination It says it can't find my home but I switched back to maps and it works fine,
Popup Ads The Game This movie trivia game is good enough, if you can handle the never ending popup ads for games.
Nice for my son
Are you kidding me I PAID  just to have this game take up tons of space on my phone. It does nothing but CRASH every five or so minutes  I can't believe that I didn't pay attention to user ratings PRIOR to buying this game.
Not as good as it looks Looks like a really good game but the graphics are terrible
Jungle castle run Boring boring boring The most exitement I've gotten from this game was reviewing it.
Boing It does not even work properly
Coco  dress Best game  ever
It keeps getting stuck on loading the activities, see all brings up just a load icon and if you go into choose and get all the way till it says an activity at the top after the make button it then just gets stuck loading again.
How How do you play this game
Won't let me slide When I  try to slide it just makes me go off of side I'm so deleting by his app but if fix that I will give u full rating
Doesn't work for me at all. Locates me just fine but it doesn't let me request a taxi and I live in the US. I signed up and tried again but still it didn't work.
Kotor No text shows up in any of my conversations. Makes it impossible to play without knowing how to answer. Fix it
Another good game thats spoiled by ridiculous in app purchases needed to progress. I know the developer needs to make money but this system is simply terrible.
Rubish U only get round 5 levels then u hav 2 pay 4 the rest. And its well expensive. I recomend Were's My Water 2. Its a lot better and u get all levels 4 free
Changing my review from 5 stars to 2 because latest update doesn't do anything except crash on open. I paid for a twitter app and now I haven't got one  will revert my review when it works again.
Amazing Game Too bad it crashes CONSTANTLY after each battle on my Xperia Z2.  I can't make it past the 3rd fight.  Thanks for wasting my time and money Square, I'll be certain to remember this before purchasing any future games.
Poor Gamebel
Really How does this app get such great reviews I pointed it directly at the moon and it gave me Jupiter
Hate it...only steal my money
Why you no add actual lazers I got this harry potter wand and I was like I should get this app and my wand would be like MAGIC it wasn't. I played non stop on the games to get the coins. I wasted my time. I wanted real freakin' lazers.
Programming mistakes It needs to improve more in programming so tht you will overcome some fatal mistakes in chess. I hade twice chackmate where was not, and I had two pieces of elements like queen at same time. So just hve a look on those aspects.
Rhythmic Game Nope. There was nothing rhtymic about it at all.
Fix Fieldrunners HD I payed for both of these apps and they are now unplayable. Screw it. Deleting both games....
This is my 3rd time Last time I had over 25 pearls 13,000 sand dollars, and over 10,000 algae rebooted my phone lost it all. This is the last time I'm doing this. I have paid for packages and I won't make that mistake again.
           
Too many adverts The numbers only go up to 10 and there are too many inappropriate adverts when using the back button to switch between game types. A good effort but needs improving
The game sucks no fun Every time I turn it does not turn right and when I lose control it is hard to get to control. In a tablet it is easy. Don't like the game.
Not worthing
Won't update paid version on Amazon Shucks you won't update the version I bought on Amazon.  Still at version 1.0
I want my money back I want a refund as soon as I got it it would not let me get a refund
This is a joke, I payed for this app and absolutely loved it, you guys did great... Until today's update... Whatever has been done needs to be fixed because it no longer works for anything, making it a waste of money. Ridiculous.
Doesn't work. Ad scam. Doesn't work with 2 yr old Samsung LCD TV. Ads show every time you change a screen in settings. Asks to rate before you even use the program. Terrible app. Wouldn't recommend this to my worst enemy.
Add more stores
Good game for kids OkMalumNatis its pretty cool for kids
Doesn't work It's a total junk, always works for only 30 min or so and stops. Every time you take picture, it shuts down tracking, after picture taken, they can not be open in the app. Only pain, used to work long time ago, unreliable.
Stupid It's so anticlimantic you think there's going to be lights poping out of the camera but it doesn't stupid just stupid
Multiplayer Did Apple payed you to release Multiplayer only on IOS
Hated it So I'm looking for a nice app to keep my siblings off of I found this app and I try to scan my finger but all it says was access denied so please do not download this its a waste of time
Can't play An ad for train simulator pops up and I can't take it down. Havnt even gotten to the menu. Needs to be fixed
Very few states are involved.improvise ur database
So sad Love this game but it crashes after the ending of my first game. ..then in takes 30 min to hr before I can play again.  Hopefully gets fixed soon
Too many glitches Really REALLY wanted to like this game, but career mode is just filled with glitches. Gave it about 9 hours of play to really make up my mind, but It's not worth the money right now, just wish I could get a refund.
annoying new v2.1 is total rubbish always crashing... downgrading back to v.1
Not accurate Says today will be load shedding but there is nothing
Some stuff in there kinda sucked im a big fan of dubstep this kinda sucks good effort do lol
Cool app but...... I paid for pro how come you still watermark my photos I choose a custom logo but it does not show up..none of your samples show the watermark....FALSE ADVERTISING
It's not dot to dot It's not the game for me
Frustrated The game is good but most of the time it crashes and just gives a headache while playing multiplayer due to problem in network  or connection problems
I'm really upset... I just bought the whole pack since my son loved the free ones but was getting bored. The parent section worked until I downloaded the calls... Please fix or refund...ridiculous
Stupid I unstalled it and it still does not work
I like the emojis, but they dont work all the time...  never work on FB...
Ashtakkaste Beda
Takes your gold bars and coins when its daily bonuses i have contacted support and nothing ever happens
Full of ads New update shows apps almost always after pressing home button. REALLY annoying. And I stand by this. Everything is already turned off. But home button still gives sponsored ads. Too bad, I really loved this launcher.
Mock draft disability You can not go into your draft activity without the app crashing
Does not work This opens and closes what a waiste of money give it back to my google play account so I can just spend it on a game that will work yo honestly. 
Scam Just cant seem to win also you can't change your bets low enough to keep playing. Spin after spin I learned a long time ago never ever to by coins. I WILL NEVER SPEND A DIME TO PLAY ANY GAME AGAIN 
Improvements have to be done In this game there is no high score and any options in this.Its better to be improved.
Unhappy I purchased 3 of the Monkey Preschool games tonight for my son who loves the apps.... However they will not download to my Galaxy, I keep getting an error 491 message. Very unhappy at the waste of money and now I have a very upset 2 year old 
Garbage Won't let me turn on search history, can't find any of my saved searches thus making this app useless.
Lame Do I need to ask a friend
Hated it......new version Coin moving speed way too slow Hated it
very bad app.cant upload item to be sold.almost all Ghanaians are complaining of signup problems. fix dat
Can't pass mission I try my best still can't pass the first mission.
This app ruined my phone. I can't even back up an app it keeps typing passwords without me touching my phone. Don't buy this app and save your money because it is not worth it. I have the note 3 running on kitkat just fyi
Boys and girls 3d It  bad  games  I  have  too  tilt
Horrible AI No way in hell most games either me or my opponent will have the perfect bones to play. Uninstalled until AI is fixed.
No longer working.. error905 It is good, but it should be more like a dollar 99
App useless after latest update
DO NOT BUY slow with pictures, sometimes works with songs. Does not work at all with videos. No point wasting your time and money.
Won't work at all... Registered for an account and app tells me that 'may have entered an incorrect email address', even tried the forgot password link and to register an account again. Paid for an app i can't even log in to, let alone use
its fun but..... they want u 2 buy the levels n i dont want 2 please make this game BUT make it that u can pay spongbob money thats in the game
Junk Said I had free mins then while making call told me I needed more credits for calls out of its range 
It just keeps getting worse Such a shame for what was once a great app
Still no cutting scores Still no cutting scores
Loved it tell the update it keeps crashing
Wind speed does not show on Samsung galaxy S4. ....
Lousy Does not accept the address properly. Meru needs to get the act straight on this app.
DID NOT LOAD I wanted to play it it looked really fun But it needs to load first in order to play Plz fix and I'll give 5 stars thank u  
bad, has no text after opening the app i saw that there was no text so i could not understand how to play  please improve would have given it zero stars
Sucks . useless app Sucks .useless app False advertsing on how great this app is...one can only check certain channels approximately  10 or so and cannot pick anything else. Easier to use the banner system on the decoder itself.
Disconnects all the time I have only had it for a month and it keeps disconnecting.... my WiFi is not slow and the device keeps losing Signal from my phone even with all the bars
Still want a refund You said you fixed it but it's still far to slow could I please just get my refund as I'm not using it and I've re downloaded football manager 2014 as I think it's much better
It keeps going up to level 8 I beat the game but it keeps flashing. Fix and then I will give more stars
Wrong items Constantly linking to def wrong items...scan babywipesfood thermometer. Scan fruit squash drinkgold bead sandals to name two of many examples UNINSTALLING
Update Sucks Good board game. Graphics are really bad. Paying for HD is stupid. No multiplayer. Expensive inapp purchases.
Very booooring hated it.. It's rather irritating than funny.games should be Timepass..not like this. Please do not install
Nonsense game No features...
Can not download Its top at 66 percent...  And i have to download it over and over again....  But its stop at 90 mb...  Pls fix this i have fast net
I didn't like it This is hanging again and again I don't think this is good not good don't download
Totally messed up Changed phones.  App changed and now can't get  back to my account.  Nice job cutting off your fans zynga
Brak moliwoci wylogowania uytkownika.
Doesnt work Went from 0 62 on the highway and we were still driving and it went back down to 0, so.  Innacurate
Great game The net on the 2nd court keeps disappearing and need more ways to get mp
Its just ok It needs to be able to get instructions how to use the bonus points like what is 05  And Earn hints that's a joke and then all the ads, I'm just going to delete this app
I would like a refund, please. My daughter bought this game without my consent, so if you would be so kind as to refund me the money, that would be fantastic.
Fun but glitchy Got thru several levels, then the game froze, wouldn't let me move on. Tried skipping it even though I answered correctly but it kept bringing me back to the same question  it cost me the coins. Can't play anymore since it's froze.
What's the problem Not being able to download the additional data. Obb plz help
Won't let me register It says it can't load and to try again later.
Force close I am not happy Can't play for mor then a min without a force close. I have dq8 and it does just fine lol
Super upset Is this not working anymore I have purchased but cannot authorize my twitter account, so disappointed  I'm using Samsung Galtab 2 and on Android 4.1.2, pls fix it 
Fake apps install nhi kre
Meh So laggy. Too hard to control players. Buttons awkwardly placed. Waste of money
Why no NY Why cant New York get involved
Unable to used linked Wallpaper Not showing option of linked Wallpaper anywhere do solve this issue
Resets Downloaded this game yesterday, had 2500 coins. Came back this morning and saw I only have 500. So does it reset it self everyday Needs fixed. 5 stars when it gets fixed or I'm deleting.
My  little  pony lullaby I can't play  l don't  know  how to get  it  started
Does not work. I paid the .9 9 cents for this app. And it doesn't work. It always has am error message.  Please refund me my money, fix the issue or replace it with  another app. Thank you.
Doesnt work on my tablet Keeps coming up insert valid sim please try again later.  Works on my phone ok. Got a smart tab 4 sim card works ok
Power keno Can't get it to open Please help
Nothing can b delivered at our pin. I would say worst service even snapdeal and myntra is far better service everything in time and quality is superb.. Flipkart u really need to improve ur service or u r going dowm
Just got home from work so I have time to play the game but it is horrible and I don't like it. I hate it.
Gets boring after some time
Inventive When I am playing dis game I feel lyk am really having a skate reid it excellent game nd INVENTAL GAME. I should hv giving it ten stars but no way. I really lv it
Not working I've noticed that I'm losing followers but the app doesn't tells me who unfollowed me
Boring
Too Much Ads Is this a game or ad show 
Fix It Never had I used an useless app like this before. It has the most bugs I have ever seen This is a poor app...
Buttons Suck Like S Every Time I try to go to a place it doesnt work fix... NOW
This is nt built well,it does nt check abv 1 and a king didnt av d ability to move Any where within is lane,d builder did nt do is feasibility study
Cannot  install Can not install on Galaxy  Tab 4. Looked for the APK trying to fix it but can't  find one.
Wait Gate Timer Starts Over Newest update didn't fix this problems...Every time I log back into the game the wait gate after level 60 in the endless map zone restarts.  Please fix this problem.
The game hangs Unresponsive if you accelerate and try to turn Nice scenery but useless.. and my Sam S3 restarted after uninstall  degraded to 1 star poorly programmed DO NOT INSTALL not install
can't choose letters same problem everyone else is having most letters are greyed out should of listened to the reviews but that's what the refund button is for
LAME LAME LAME LAME Booooooooooooiiiiiiiinnnnnnggggg
What Dont u ever download this thin destroyed my fone
Cool but till recent update... Now whenever i try to get into angel upgrade the game crashes... It keeps on crashing while playing too... Dev team correct this issue... I wud def give a 5 star.... I am using xperia z2
No It might have been fun 4 years ago, but it runs slowly, everything lags, it's all one big blob of content and it's one of the few times where I say Clash of Clans is better.
Nexus 4 Same error as the others.... Error Marmalade V6.0.6 323198 please fix it asap thanks
Unfair business practices I paid for all of the levels in this game and I had to Uninstall and reinstall the game, and now you want me to pay for the levels again You either give me the levels I paid for or I will complain to the BBB
       ,   ,   
So much for access Downloaded but can't access. What's the point of Vitality Drive if I can't pair with your device Hopefully some consumers are seeing these reviews before signing up.
Tooooo faaaast....i used to love this game i only finished the 7 first stages
It was fun while it lasted, but half the time it gets stuck loading, and now it doesn't run at all...
Won't work Entered information, screen is blank. Want it to work. Can't even get the stars right. Would give it a 1.
Misleading Says you supposed to buy but no pay option
Not free false advertising
Does NOT work under childrestricted user account On my Nexus 7, I have a restricted account for my kids. Toca Builder says it can't validate with server and just dies under the child account but works under the main account.  This is a problem.
Worst Game Ever I know you have to pay to get everything but it would not even let you paint you nails on one whole hand
Won't install. Won't download.
Christmas is gone  worst update ever After the update it crashes...anytime, any place, during races, during scrolling on the maps.  Also wasting gems because scrolling is not smooth and accidentally places items.  Frustrating
Worst, it doesn't even open
New Update doesn't work on Droid Turbo Old version of this App was awesome, my favorite game. Just updated and now it crashes almost immediately.
Mando SNS Sucks I hate mandatory participation in social networking. I feel leveraged by the neccessities of convienence Sell yourself out to the almighty internet power of google. How did I ever survive without you
Ads For a children's educational app i am disgusted that there are ads for hot sexy videos Rather than pay to have them removed we are uninstalling. Thankfully it is an app we use together and my child didn't click on it. Shameful.
Absulutley Hate It Whenever I try to jump it wont let me and I couldent go any other way. I hate this game and I do not recomand iit
Very good game but only a few free levels I lovee this game but theres only about 67 challenges available. Wish they would have more free levels.
Jaipur ka to h hi nhi
Slow game play but good when you get into it 
BS You should fix this game. I play people with a way higher level and even when they miss they're still getting points. This is stupid Why is their no female characters
Stops working constantly Useless app. Doesn't work. Stops working every single time I use it.
Beware Scam Low rating because they try to scam you. The icon to buy coins sometimes has a banner that says sale. When you click it there is an option to get 4000 coins 100 free, then it tries to charge you 20.
Nothing This  is nothing close to what they have online. all you can do is color. if you're going to have an app you need to have the same stuff you have on your web page. That the kids fall in love with.
Too many pop ups and ads Game is ok...but after Every game pop ups pimping their other games...very annoying...deleted
Doesn't work I just installed this app, but have been unable to make it function as it does on my iPhone. Very disappointed.
I want my many to back
Sorry slightly annoyed will not even open says error marmlade or something like that pleaseeee fix 
What is this OK first of all on my phone all it shows is a black screen when I want to play it then I want to get out if it and it takes time to go back to my home screen so if I were you DO NOT DOWNLOAD
Tight slots and minimum bets are too high you only get a few spins from the first two games because you never have enough coins to take even one spin of other games. ..don't waste your time.
Stupid game Just by looking screenshots it's a nice one but it's a too boring
Jackpot  party I'm unstalling the game Reason  being  is because  it takes  to long to load, also i hit the big win. But the freezes
Danny and kai Do Hhjhjgggh
Why oh why Why didn't u add rainbow dashs tail and mane pls add it and I'll give u give stars
Useless, why change a gud app to useless 1
Crashes on start up Note 4 user here. The app crashes on start up and I am unable to use it. I sent a report today when I first experienced the issue. Please reply
Okay if it was free This game is not worth your money. It's boring and I quit after 15 minutes of playing. Can i have my money back please
What Indie music I had the volume all the way up and still could not hear anything. The game worked. But no sound. Sorry but I uninstalled.
Hard to use Uses my phones internal camera so I have to turn the phone around to scan stuff blind and there is no settings to change this
Lost all my photos for the 2nd time Again ....  locked my photos with this app and after few days I opened the app to see them but I didn't find any thing....this is shit I can't find my photos. And I'm wating from you developers to answer me.
Tighter than any casino I have ever played at .   And I have spent money just to watch it disappear  each time good god maybe you should  not be so tight Bad
Suckes bull DONT DOWNLOAD IF YOU DUDES DO YOU WILL HAVE BAD LUCK AND HAVE A FEAR AND YOUR MOM WILL KILL U GUYS GOOD LUCK AND WONT HAVE A GIRLFREIND
Really. On the pics it shows an actual laser light. But in reality its just blinking lights
Not working Would rate more stars seeing as i have quite a few of the bradford learning games for 4 of my children, this is the only one that after purchasing says it cannot load on this tablet... If this is fixable will give higher rating
Dumb App I keep loseing
It does not work This app is useless
Waste of my time After loosing my progress for the 4th time because it cant connect to the server always right after my first match i uninstalled it right away. Life is too short.
IT DOESNT WORK YOU HAVE TO BE LOGGED IN
The online mode cost me 20k Why my opponent get more shots than I do  I got 1 shot , he got like 3 shots ahead of me , and I shoot fast ..Suddenly , He got over 300 and I got 100 and less shots.And when shot , it sometimes goes wrong.
Stupid Worthless
Game is fake
 
Sucks This game sucks, it crashes everytime i touch the string. Fuck off tiny spider
Not very cool in my book This app sucks I purchased it from my iPad and it installed on a device  I don't even own anymore . Now I'm out my money and an app I paid for.
Requires Access to Messages I don't understand if this app is real, why must it access my messages This may be one of many ways it trys to convince you there are real ghosts nearby.
S4 LTEA Not suitable for big screen user, because some function is on top of screen, after zoom in can't move around in photo, slow process. Hope can improve
No way to use on social media I got this because none of the smilies in my phone reflect my faith.  But these can't be pulled up when posting on social media galaxy s5 user and also, they're way too large and goofy looking.  Disappointed. 
Not for me Thanks
It Say or Sad up up sh I starts off liR pict of me th orTha utu g Review un Ga this allr a litt but s to slow when a city  injwr liL
Everything is over priced I like the concept and the game play is good but...the adds are bad and to compete at any level you have to spend lots of real money. My advice spent the money on a real set and go play.
Great game but online needs changing Online game is riddled with problems
New update doesn't work
369 super way Leno I've bought more then one of ur games my bad None of them will open n no one will refund me
Load of crap Bad controls bad graphics ads that interrupt  the basic game play.
Crashes or invalid license Bought on sale a while back and still feel cheated.  Will not run on my KitKat tablet.  Runs on Fire TV but can't control it without a Moga controller.  Typical Gameloft.
Real shame Great game idea its shameless that it doesn't work anymore Long waits to load, constantly kicking players out and hanging... Don't waist your time Useless support Real developers should make other game of the type, this one is over
Worst Game Its the worst game evermorphed pictures and no challenge is d only reason DAT its a worst gameBut the game has amazing graphics,but no proper opponentsTime waste
App won't open on Android device A bit disappointed, and i say a bit, only cuz i make it a point never to rely on free apps any more.  My daughter colored in 5 pictures of her new book and got all excited, only to be let down by the app.
Won't start at all Crashes when starting first level, tried reinstalling a few times and clearing cache etc but it just crashes as soon as the first cut scene begins every time Nexus 6 running 5.1.
It won't work. I've tried clicking, dragging, and tilting and I t still won't work. The farthest I can get is to the ice pack part. Uninstalling.
Crazy dentist Thank you Bryan montano and Loretta love that is true why does it only go to 8 levels the person that made this game needs to fix it if you do I will put more stars
Possible spyware A flashlight app this large Looks very suspicious to me. I uninstalled this immediately. Too much malware around here.
Nice game. Run smooth but need some solid graphic support as sometimes mountains got vanished only runway remains in view in result plane crashes in  mountains.
Crashes I can barely use this app all it does is crash yet it works fine for my brother on his galaxy s4 please fix compatibility for my phone thank you
I hate this game so much I hate it because there is only one room unlocked.
Poor This app is very bad. Despite the control's allowing you to block the droid from been able to use rare and vulgar word's the droid still manages to play them Be careful if you allow children to play this game, they can use and learn swear word's
It's 1 hrs still SMS ot reached I thought service would have been improved but its same what was 1 year back so again removing the app
Game stopped loading Never had a problem with this game, but today the game will not load Had in app purchases and now the game won't work
Use Home widget, freezes phone Nice app, great looking widget, using Nexus 6 and it freezes the home screen for 5 seconds. No swipe, no tap, then phone comes to life. I will give it a few days but its annoying. Not happy
Removed ads return Paid to have ads removed but after reinstall ads are back. No response from developer, email or otherwise. Flagged, if you have same problem I suggest flagging as well.
Cannot run I paid for install.but cannot run one time.i use samsung galxy s6 edge 32g.
What's happening Box w message says be back on line in 2 hours. I seen this the first time at 730pm est. It is now 945pm est. Will I be able to play your game today
Doesn't work with Android 5 Keeps saying it needs an internet connection. Needs fixed
Hate hate hate Every time you don't reach your goal it takes you back to the begining and it gets borging after a while
Not working 65 Stops updating for a couple days occasionally in the last few months. Reinstalling doesn't help.
       
I aint able to check anything beyond the topics... Even after selecting ALL the topics it is taking me back to the topics page.. again n again... Can u pls check this
App crashed App used for a game and didn't start anymore due to error requiring downloads. I want a refund
Boring and glitchy Got three errors in one minute. Very limited game. Uninstalling
Deinstalls itself Same as in Mintho's case the Pro version deinstalls itself on my Galaxy S5 with Gear smartwatch. It is a long lasting problem reported many times before and preventing me from using the app.
Game freezes a lot. Please fix it. Also Pippi's voice is too British
They lied They said hints were free
bakwas fzool .folish .time waste .its only i p l .
Freezing It keeps freezing on register and login page and it can't find login info for me or my wife. WTH r u people doing Sitting down and making money for nothing
Updated and still doesn't work for galaxy tab S Fix the constant crashing on tab S and I will rerate
A good game overall Reduced to 1 star because after the last update the game uninstalled hinself losing my entire progress and all my purchases.
Fazool
Please fix the repinning notification and I'll return it to 5 stars. I have been barely using the app since this error occured.
Garbage
No more bonus points So ready to delete  don't get to play much.  Would rather go to a real casino before purchase points for this.
Don't download games
Wtf. All my maps are gone..... i bought like 6 maps awhile ago, tried to restore my purchases nothing worked. I would like to get a refund or my maps back.
Really Do an update that kicks everyone out Ya this game was great until your update just kicked everyone out. Do you want people to not play your game anymore The update did the opposite of what you wanted...
New adware is a loser This app went from great to poor after adding an annoying  trending apps near you floating button that is always in your face.  Time to look for a better alternative.
Love it
Sucks If you make a first down and get tackeled its not a first down. The worst yards. Who cqme up with 1st and 50 It just sucks
Horrid It was awful. Absolutely rubbish and the other side of the most of your choice of the sun is out of stock and will not be published in for 8th 8 I can do to make it. I love o
Cartoon network is better than this...
It's not work
  .
way toooo easy. absolutely no challenge.
Don't update Don't update the game because you will not be able to play the game. Can't login.  Booooooooooo negative 10 stars. And i just had bought the vip ticket.  Booooooo
Its a blank space i dont know how to put an story
This app has offers for free chips but the offers seldom ever pay the player. Then when you write for help they say it's a third party problem and they can't help.
I thought this would be pretty cool I standed corrected you can't do anything unless u buy the full app which costs money u can only do  3 nails this is a complete rip out
A simple cyclic would be better Need better control of the cyclic. The touch pad doesn't respond sometimes.
Locks up phone to get out of app. Uninstalled
Weird people on chat Didn't bother trying to play as world chat was in the middle of men hitting on a supposedly 11 year old girl.... Wtf great gaming standards you guys have there uninstalled immediately.
It will not download at all. Refund by chance My son was very excited for it and it wont work.
Questionable permissions Why does this app need the following permissions 1. Access to my photosmediafilesexternal storage  2. Access to my camera 3. FULL Access to my network, including to view all my WiFi and network connections 4. Run at startup
Why offer it in Canada if it's not going to work This app is why people switch to uber. Don't give me my address and tell me where I am unless you can actually request a taxi. Terrible and misleading business model
Basics doesn't even work Cannot log in, PLEASE FIX
Good Needs some material design and still no nfc balance check and no way to disable push notifications
No way Doesn't even play back the voice at the end let alone save it. Stupid app don't get it
Once quick and fun I liked it once. Now overloaded with bloat and ads. They successfully squeezed out every bit of fun.  Amazing what greed does to gaming companies.
I don't  know . . Needs more people  RIGHT IF AGREED
Ridiculous even for kids Don't waste your time.
No audio I made calls for 2 days just fine now I make a call and can't hear anything. I uninstalled it and reinstalled it and still not working I'm done with it. It don't work anyway
Very disappointed Will no longer install on my phone since I upgraded to Kit Kat please fix this since I have purchased the app and it is one of my favorite apps.
Glitch Get to level 6 in first challenge and theres no other cars around while racing but saying I'm coming 4th can't continue on with game. Please help.
Game is good but I will play it then an ad comes on and the screen will go black...i used to be able to watch videos to gain tickets but now for some odd reason im not able to ...fix this game its fun
Fix it I want to play this app when i opened the game i picked up mr cuddles with dog flash cuddles fly and then it message  unfortunately jetpack joyride has stopped please fix it i not want to broke my tablet 
The app isnt opening
KEEPS CLOSING KEEPS CLOSING ON ASUS TF300T JELLY BEAN DON'T BUY AS IT WILL TAKE LONGER TO DOWNLOAD THAN YOU CAN GET A REFUND AS YOU HAVE TO DOWNLOAD ADDITIONAL  CONTENT BEFORE YOU CAN PLAY, VERY POORLY DEVELOPED GAME
Xperia ion hspa Waste on my money..just can open the intro video and crash after it and make my phone restart.secondly try it same.need to resolve this and feedback ASAP
Repair karalo
Won't load Every time I try to play this, it starts to load but only goes up to 8. Then after a couple minutes, it says its not responding. Please fix
It wouldn't play videos I clicked the videos and it kept saying no connection if fixed I would defo rate five
So Many ads Ads are everywhere, no readability. Not good at all, you guys can do far better than this.
Y'all are gonna have a baby someday and it will have a private part when your baby comes out are u gonna be like ewww it has a private part And I agree with dollface beauty
Won't let me register Kinda dumb if you can't register
Zoom problem I normally love this app but lately when reading some mangas automatically zoom out so far that they appear as tiny black dots  and they stay that way in later episodes please fix so i can keep reading happily and give 5 stars
US propaganda Ok but still US propaganda. Free comics and kids stuff from political issues and hatred. It is a place to help take our minds off the reality and all those US wars.
Dani Rubbish don't work
Needs an update. Strike out way too often. The pitchers stamina makes no sense and too many foul balls. Batting should be more based off of the stats I am doing a season and my best hitters are doing the worst
Selection tool does not work after last upgrade.
Runs a little slow Tons of memory on my phone, nothing else lags but this game still runs slow.  In a game that requires timing that's a killer.
DOESN'T WORK ANYMORE So I just played it like yesterday and now when I launch it . It says  Application not authorized for use on your android device  What the heckk
Worst.
Won't connect to heart rate monitor HRM was the only reason I paid for the pro version. Plenty of other apps will connect with my HRM just fine, but this one won't.
Nao tem funao de lock screen Deveria ter uma funcao para desabilitar o toque da tela. Assim a criana nao aperta o home ou cancel sem querer enquanto segura o aparelho. A versao para o iPhone tem.
WTF Ain't downloading.
Lagging and doesn't refresh automatically Was Good , this update ruin the app completely. It is horrible and questions won't refresh on opening the app. Every time I open the app I see previous questions.
IT SUCKS IT DOSENT HAVE FAIRY TAIL
Nice
Why cant you do castling Castling is one of my favorite moves in the game, and to not see it in this game really disappoints me, would love to give a higher rating, but it wasn't included.
It is very boring
My phone couldnt even open the app HTC One M9. It froze on the loading screen
CRAP It won't even log in,  it keeps saying my right password is wrong.
Funny game I love that game because I play it sooo muchhhhhh
Am I the sucker Seriously.. I don't get enough coins witch upsets me n its kinda boring 4 meso I jus play other games
Fix it I enjoyed playing this game when it was good now the servers are all messed up and its barely playable with all this lag.... and also fix lax lagoon i cant log on to my main guy... a new server already down..... 5 stars when i can get back on
Does not do what it promised I invited friend to this game, but could not receive 15k. Bad experience.
Liked
Needs work Have to tap several times to get things to work, not a lot of options, and it freezes mid into it.
Bakwas game hate it
Porcaria Reinicia sozinho toda hora. No d para usar. Quando conecta via Bluetooth no carro fica informando que a licena expirou.
Won't connect Over a month later and it's still not working...... Keeps telling me that I need Internet access when I know I do. It's been doing this for weeks.
Won't let me go into the game Every time I try and open the app it restarts. And when its finally letting me play, it says Sorry No WiFi Connection. I have WiFi, but why won't it let me play
Getting annoying to play The number of pop up ads is totally ridiculous if I could take back one star I would and I would only give it 3 stars.........NOW DOWN TO 2 STARS
new stars Great. Nice work, But we still need group chat, Hmm 'nd I'll rate you 5star
I used to play this game all the time before I updated the game but now I hate it cuz before the update I was very good at this game so I hope they change it back hopefully soon so I can get back into drifting
Rip off My daughter desperately wanted to see her own coloring come to life. However this app does absolutely nothing I hold my phone over the page for upwards of a minute and nothing,nada,zip,zero. Way to crush a kids smile Disney.
Never works properly For a modern everyday user based company this is unacceptable
I cant even get in.
Every time I try to open it, it shows the opening credits and then just exits automatically
Unhappy The app doesn't work. It freezes when I view trips or when I want to make some edits on my trips when I'm not the driver. It says I'm speeding when I am within the speed limit...no ways. It needs some serious work.
Game is broken When I beat my high score I cannot continue playing..... Please fix this
Needs more..... I am on level 51, my sticker book is full, I didn't get a reward for doing so except for the diamonds for completing each page, now there's nothing to look forward to. Please update soon or will be forced to uninstall.........
Does not load Never loads
Crushed Every time i open the app... it stopped and shut down. The last update is seriously rubbish. Fix it.. i will give 5 stars
 It's a boring game.......
Advanced protection is not working.. Hey I hide the app by the advanced protection option  But i can't get back it in to my home menu. The ways to open the hidden appslock application are not working  Wat a dam is this..
Bad one Very irritating app..... poor picture.... loud music...... my son dont like it
Game reset itself lost everything Bought the game... still had in app purchases... anyways bought 2 guns extra spent another 10.. ok cool... playing for almost 2 weeks today everything is reset Lost my purchases and progress wtf Nice scam thx
Too many glitches. I used to love it but now the balls fly all over in the wrong direction
NEED A REFUND OR FIX IT. IT KEEPS SAYING UNLICENSE VERSION OF WEdDING DASH DELUX PLEASE FIX OR GIVE ME A REFUND
Buggy Doesnt recalculate direction. As others have said it says W when pointing N, S or E. Even when gps is toggled off then back on. Disappointing on the Note 3.
Can't download and can't refund, hate it.
It's not free.
Freezes up on my Xperia z1 Seems to work fine at times but now it just freezes up the moment I click battle. Used to freeze up on random screens warranting a restart. Now even a restart is not helpful. I'm not having so much fun anymore. Unhappy.
Good app but... You expect if you pay for it that removes the adverts. Sadly this is not the case. Terrible money grabbing.
Monopoly bingo Haven't played in 6 days due to connection issues...keeps telling me no internet access.  None of my other games are having problems...has to be this games glitch somewhere.   Needs to be fixed
2 things i dont like about this game This game takes up alot of space and yet only ONE recipe is unlocked This game don't deserve 5 stars at all
I  LOVE  THE   GAME   VERY  MUCH Jerusha
Never works It doesn't update location even after several hours. This is no good when I want to check my daughter is still where she says she is.
Glitch that kills me. After Checkpoint 1 when nothing is ahead of me, my character dies. If you fix the glitch i will rate 5 stars
Since the last update I am unable to get in...just says retrieving data..please fix this and I will give more stars...
Free letters gone I have no idea what happened but now every letter I get I have to pay 10 credits for. I can't afford to buy credits just to read even the first letter which use to be free
Free Until my daughter starts playing it and it says we have to buy the full version what a rip off Delete this app
The lip sync The lip sync is always off. please fix it especially when you pay for an app. Other than that it's really fun my children
Capt.Christian I couldn't login with my existing account let me know when you fix this I eventually did manage to log on but it doesn't display any vessels and yes I'm connected the older version displays vessels so my rating remains the same
Don't work I went on it and it won't load the songs. Fix it I thought I was going to like the fame but it doesn't work
Only hind is there
Problem The screen goes black whenever i start  to play it
I have wasted my money. I cannot cast properly. The casting seems to work in the reverse.when reeling and tilting back lowers the rod tip Am so disapointed
It doesnt gets open This game doesnt start at all
No money Do and I say do not buy anything you can't get your money back
Broken on Note 4 The app seems to think my phone has a menu button, which it does not. I am unable to get to any menu functions to save or export cartoons. Used to love this on Note 2, now it's unusable.
Zaib If you play every stage with full stars then you will have not enough credit to purchase the required cars for races. But you can only purchase them by real money which is too expensive. So Not Good Game at all. Waste of time
I hate this game I don't want to give it 5 stars.When I want to put the music off it puts the sound of the car. Do not download this game.  It's really boring.
Worst game.. I have purchased this game and I'm shocked that it won't open and force close.  This is after sending maeby crash reports and the developer hasn't responded.. Give my money  back as you guys won't rectify the problem. 
Annoying when opening I would love to see the ability to turn off the location tracker. Open it and click on my favourite only to have the location tracker move everything.  A real pain.
Fucking expensive Think ive just wasted R500 in 1 our
Doesn't work on Snapdragon 805 phones Doesn't work on my moto turbo and note 4 of many others. Pls fix it.
Really.....The game won't even open. The screen is just black. I want my money back or I want the game to work.
Bad app they should make the  words easier for kids
Muito caro Comprei para usar com o mylink da Chevrolet. Depois de 30 dias sem pagar os 50 dolares ele nem conecta mais na central multimdia. E a navegao no  muito boa. No recomendo.
WTF They took away my remaining points to offer me a premium service.  No way.  Bye bye skout
Doesn't work after update Freeze after you chose peppaJorge. Is possible rollback the older version
Wrong game I had this game on my old phone and it was nothing like this what's happened to it DO NOT DOWNLOAD
Doesn't work for me When ever I try to play it won't do anything
This is the cheesiest app even for toddlers. Sounds like a guy in his garage recording on his phone playing his guitar.
Paid for it still get ads This thing sucks.  Has way to many ads and unless you buy more add ons it only gives written directions. Use Google maps. It's free and it doesn't suck.
My name is Hazel. I feel awful I feel terrible. I hate kill
can't restore my already bought stories
Worst It's game for below 8 years children
This app content only few cars no any other activity plz done better
Takes up to much space I deleted almost EVERYTHUNG ON MY PHONE AND IT STILL DOSENT WORK . please fix and I'll rate higher and my friends will download and rate.
App doesnt work This app opens and then sbits right down. My 5 year old crys everytime So annoying
  ...      .    
Dry Nothing ever shows up
License not validated,want my money back,my son realy disappointed
What the heck I have lost three games because it takes so long on a cycling to allow you to hit the ball. the cycling is a great part of the game except when it ruins your victory by taking too long to let you hit the ball.
Very bad game in the world     hate it Dnt play this game it is very bad when I download it in my Iphone cant say soooo bad game
Not supporting in samsung core 1 I am using samsung core nd tried to use tango app but unfortunately its not showing call option tango out is not showing anywhere or not at between friends nd invite  plz help me to sort out
I like the game but every time I checked different cameras my phone just shut down. So I give it a 2 star.
Ster kinekor app This app used to work great but it totally suck now. I'm not able to make a booking and cannot set the cinema not good at all
Not happy Amazon fire tv got controller support and so has nexus tv, but not phones or tablets and what's with the constant stuttering during game play
The app won't load past the main screen where you pick see all activities
Betala inte r det vrt att betala fr en app som tvingar dig att starta om luren varje gng du gr ut ur spelet och sen ska in igen Den sger anslutningsproblem, man mste vara inloggad p samma konto som man var nr man kpte.
NO WAY l only did two things or actually  2 animals at least 3 animals any ways like hated it
Same problem still scratchy audio Audio is scrarchy at times on new version.
Does not work At least on my phone and a few others varying makers this app says it cannot detect orientation sensors. What a waste.
CRASH Crashes when I try to do mock draft. Fix ASAP 
The first few Times i tryed it and all my mods disapeared please fix then i will give 5
The beach sons they are cheat me The tom can't fight to Ben and they give one discription and I downlad that that's one game my money is gone anywere
No longer works with IP board Went from 5 star to 1 star because it no longer works with the latest IP Board update.  Get that working again and it'll be 5 stars again
Will not play do not get tell they fix.......
Can't go very far Easy to run out of machetes  What you need to clear the forestdo quests
HUGE VIRUS Please dont install, fuks up your battery life forever and installs a virus in your phone so even if you uninstall the app you still have the virus.
Will not validate Please refund
FREEZES Awful. Playing half way through a game and it froze, had to take out my phone battery to get it to go off. Tried again and same thing happened. UNINSTALLED
Not working It is just playing upto H not playing more alphabets I am uninstalling it
Oola
NO STARS I WANT A REFUND RIGHT NOWDO YOU UNDERSTANDplease I want my money back.
Doesn't work anymore App starts but when I click any button automatically shuts down This happens since Lollipop
Ad game Between 1min there will be 34 ads
Wtf I downloaded this app for other hacking app , because it's come first in add ,they're is written , download this app  run for 30 sec , i done but , it doesn't give me nothing.  
Wifi not working for a Webos tv with... Motorola D3, Huawei MediaPad
Nope It logs off on me its so stupid fix itn
Why no freeware on Android as yet I phone has it we don't. This is wrong in so many ways.
Won't even let me in the app just keeps crashing on my galaxy alpha
Local Weather It worked when I first installed it, but now it's stopped and won't show anything.  It did the same thing on my tablet.
Great idea But having a young drivers fee is a little inconvenient, I would use this so much more if it were for that.
Cheat FIX, if player doesn't want to lose they just hold card and nvr play it. The time won't run out. BS
Great app but no connectivity I used to be able to upload times, but now only see unable to connect. Shame. It was the competitive element that made this app great.
does not work
Freezings problem My kids love this game but, freezing problem ruined the whole gaming experience. Could you please fix this problem and until then refund me please Thanks.
Not Niceeee..... Only one girl and  few things is unlocked but we can't do any thing acpect dress
Can't play with out data
Its old I used to use mixit
Great game Having problems to get game open. When the game is loading it forces close everytime. Please fix.
Nice idea but I'm keep getting a bank timeout FNB  Fix it and I'll try again
Liked until progress deleted by game It would do some good to use words under the icons so one knows that pressing the icon WILL DELETE YOUR PROGRESS and start the scene from the beginning.  I'm very disappointed.
Visibility I should be able to control regarding who knows i am on whatsapp. Its not necessary i want everybody having my number to know i am using whatsapp. It should ask 2 options visibility to all or selected contacts
There are programming errors at least on the Italian antham In that on pressing a key Apprentice grade often, no note is played.
Great fun Easy to learn with lots of ways to win. Multi is broken. Don't buy unless you want to play solo. will up rating when multi works.
Horrible I used to love this game now barely play it because almost every two minutes there are ads popping up its ridiculous. Please fix or I will be deleting. There never used to be that many ads. They pop up before you can even play.
I F HATE THIS GAME IT SUCKS YOU NEED TO UPDATE AIB AIR AND IT SAYS I HAME ALREDY AND I GO BACK WONT LET ME PLAY WORST GAME EVER DONT BUY EVER ITS THE WORST AND IT WONT GIVE ME MY REFUND SO WORST 99 I'VE EVER SPENT
Lost data's after reboots This application can not be used. after several reboots, large size games data's get missing and need to be downloaded again
Wont connect It wont conect to my obd2 bluetooth that plugs into ecu,  the torque app works fine
Game sucks I do better at the real casino at least I get a bonus or something in return. .this game takes your money and give you nothing..won't get another dollar out of me..
It won't load. It stops at 20.
Only few Stories are gud. But app always hang in seconds.
Does not work on my Acer Iconia, which is a shame because I had it on my previous tablet and it was great.  Also, was charged twice for it  not good
Doesn't work Starts to open and crashed before it gets anywhere, no error report or anything, just crash to home screen.
Stratego Medium is too easy and on hard setting it knows where every piece is. Poor AI.
Awful I play the PC version 15 hrs a week, this is straight up garbage.
Dumb It is very boring in only one thing over and over
Horrible Game won't even load. It says loading for 10mins but never loads anything. Might n a good game but ill never know. Devs need 2 seriously do something about it but deleting since it doesn't work...
Not working on HTC my9. Useless app
No This new update is the worst.  I missed out on the new lemans car because the game keeps crashing all of a sudden.   Come on guys fix this and refund me all my rs and gold I lost upgrading the car.you lost four stars on this one.
Hate it It comes on the screen then goes off .Don't play it
Great idea, needs better execution The app is appallingly bad. The idea is great but it needs to be designed and developed better. Do a major update, probably a version 2.0, and it can be a very fun game
Do not download Tried deleting 6 times, now I have to update in my attempt to delete for the 7th time. Do not download, the game is alright but it really is just a virus.
Needs Google Play Games Achievements Needs integration with Google Play Games Achievements .... 2 star for now
Ads You need to take off the video ads at the end of every game you guys are wasting MY DATA.
It's pretty cool It sucks because you can't pass leave 6 because you need the wire cutters twice and it only gives you the option ones and you need it two times to get the key from the guard at the door
TOTAL CRAP Won't even let me play. It just blacks out whenever I click the icon. Please fix
Hate it I want a refund
Too many ads I haven't even got the chance to play due to ads popping up. Uninstalling straight away.
Crashes It will let me play for about a minute but then it will crash plz fix I can see this game having potential
nice classy game just starting to play and its fun to play...shame cash limit cant be any higher to beat the players off the board or mate slightly better improved digitally perhaps
Bakwas So many ads.. Pls dont make games, make ads directly.
It doesn't work It keeps frezzing and never loads do not download
Not working Not rotating at all not showing north at all 
Sounds It sounds like somebody got into the audio files of Call of Duty and drew up some guns made them sound real They sound soooo unrealistic
Won't Open Downloaded twice. This game will not open. Claims it needs internet to play yet all my other online games open just fine. It also used wifi to download just fine but won't open. Grrrr
Last update no good After last update I can't access guild or angels keeps kicking me out please fix soon
Game not functioning correctly I re downloaded this app because I had previously bought it but it doesn't work on my s4 it blocks out letters so I can't choose what to play makes me very upset because I previously loved this game
help ea Game doesn't even start Connecting to server I verified my age and after that its loading and loading and loading. This game is taking too much time to connect to a server.  my ..my phone  acre liquid e700
Use to be fun. Now a miracle if u get free spins or any bonus'
No auto play or auto picks if I can get it in a free app why can't I get it in a paid
Give me my money back Crashes guaranteed every single time after a few minutes even on a Note 4.
Can't find it in Wear or my Watch. nexus 6 and 360. Both running 5.1.1. Watch face doesn't show up in Android Wear. It has a standalone icon and app, but no way to add to AW
Nexus 5 It hangs a lot, you would be lost..while on the way. Planning to buy a TomTom now..
Dick This is a fake an FBI should investigate this app
You really cannot' do anething
I hate it You cant serch for a manga you want to read
piece of shit
Its confusing because on some of the questions it can be more than one answer and its no explaining of how you got it right or wrong
Ad ad ad To many add seriously
new version movment is slow..please upgrade the speed
It force closes on start up Every time I start the game it automatically force closes on me. What is the point of buying a video game that doesn't work For a Sprint Samsung Galaxy smartphone.
UNINSTALLING ZERO STARS...Won't even begin to load. Frozen on the opening load page.
Won't load Can't even open the app, it crashes before I even have a chance to check it out. Disappointed.
Gave it a fair trial, wasn't impressed Problems on multiple roms, backup not allowed for some apps, refund denied.  Overall good UI but poor reliability vs the other backup app which has never failed me even though it has inferior UI
It's so stupid I want a refund I was going to download something else
E lowe Paid for the game want let me get to the next level keep telling me to upgrade which I did that now I still can't move on. Please fix or refund my money back.
Dont want to go in pools very slow en kicking me out when rotating my phone Dis app sucks
OH WOW U CANT EVEN PLAY IT JUST PLAYS A RANDOM TUNE
Im girly but I HATE this.
Not working Y won't the fruit move Thought the bugs were fixed. Well u better get ur programmers looking at the bugs again. Using a Samsung A3. Very disappointing
Terrible update I sent numerous emails for help and support and never got a response. I paid for the app but after the update it's back to the original free version. Very disappointed
Pay App On Apple it's free  deleting it now from my samsung
Can't get free tokens, it always say's that unfortunately deal or no deal has stopped working. Terrible
Control are crap
   
STILL Won't install Bought the app, that went fine installing the app, that's where things go wrong. Contacted customer services, no help. Three MONTHS later, still no response. VERY POOR SHOW
Well this game is not working in my mobile I have galaxy s 2 plz fix it thank u
Wont even open disappointed uninstalled Terrible download on my s4 and wont even load very disappointed as its a paid for app. Update so it works uninstalling.
Does not work total waste of money
No connection Come on guys I got full strong network and I still can't load the game. call of duty ghosts ps3 game has a glitch and now the game for Android phone is not working properly. Starting to loose my love for Activision games
Was great. Since last update not working.
Ads Would have been great if I didn't have to watch a minute video every time I entered the menu. Very poor ads
Online Only Great game, but requires an internet connection. It's a shame that I can't play it when I would like to.
Graphic ache nhi h ...na hi batsman ki dresses ...bhot bekar h ....don't download....is game Thoda ....New look de jese 3rd umpire decision and etc
What the Hell I've noticed on this reading in the comments for ratings it doesn't matter what the people are complaining about the company has the same exact answer for everybody what the hell that's really stupid fix your s
Terrible Clues were written by a person with dyslexia.
New Layout is hard to read I'm fond of the game. But the new layout is hard to read. And please remove the inapp offers for the paid app.
Ads Didn't even get to try the game before a pop up ad showed up. Deleated in 10 seconds. Congradulations you failed
PLZ FIX When i go to play in a game there like black things following my player and it cover most of the screen and if u fix it i will give 5 star and im on samsung galaxy tab 4
Best gluten free game Amazing. I love how you can pick your gender and name. Too bad you have to pay, but  glad it was only 1.00.
Money money money Your beter of buying a ps4 game. I have reset the game over a dozen dozen times and found it a waste. Yo chances of getting any good monsters or rune power up is nothing.  Very nice game. if u can't pay u get nothing.
Fun for 5 Minutes Annoying interuptions by full screen gogle ads. Pics get very small at high levels.
Crap Just hanging nothing works. And its not my phone or network because all my other apps work. TYPICAL MULTICHOICE
Painfull. Inaccurate departure times. Slow to update bus positions. No refresh button.
Local weather This app is slam Don't have a radar and it's probably not the right reading for it either
Ads I paid for this app and i still got ads.... Other than that it was OK. I got a refund.
Needs work When I downloaded it it didn't respond in the game part. If you fix this app I will give it 5 stars.
Wth It said I was denied without asking me to scan 1 time. .bad app
Worst game ever...... It is the worst game I have ever played in my life ..starting levels are easy but as you move in...you cannot play without the help of a video....jst disgusting
The game wont work every level has frozen 
Very poor Every time i was doing a quiz the app closed and reset itself. Unimpressed sporcle Also, not as many quizzes as what is on the website. Not worth the money. I would be less annoyed if it was free.
Not good
Doesn't work
Limited vocabulary  Why are there only 6 words in the food category Children have to expand their vocabulary knowledge. I saw the other categories but it is still limited.  Thank you
Whyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy I is so Dunn I wanted it for my little sister  but it said I have to buy the other versions
Doesn't work I try to open the game then it loads shortly after that it sends me to the home screen
It's annoying how i got to keep buying  chips I haven't got free chips not 1 time Disappointed  Currently looking for a better black jack app  Y'all keep on replying to e everyone saying every 4 hours free chips obviously that's not the case...
wth black screen
cant get on it I dislike this app because it wouldn't let me on it and it started to glitch my tab
Zeus 2 I downloaded your fame, and only get a 25 cent bank. You expect people to download and spend money from the get go. Get real.
Crash Samsung note4 Go to watch a video for extra money screen goes black and won't come back on but the music still plays.  Fix the stupid crashes and I'll give a better review
Cash APP APPrish
This crashes after 5 minutes on nexus 6 waste of money.
Pain Keeps telling I need more characters,  I had a full body ad, delete delete delete
Its all right I just need to practice to beat my dad when we play and I always end up loosing all the time so I need to get back at him for winning.So this is my practice
Sk Super
Glitch on level 2 When I have the shoe lace and paperclip to get the pliers it doesn't do anything. I touch the pliers over and over it doesn't grap it or do anything
Freezes, force closes. Ugh want a refund
Be careful I bought the game then spent about 8 bucks on it. And my son deleted it so I redownloaded it and I've lost everything and I cannot restore it. Great game just sucks loosing everything.
The level doesn't goes forward
I remember They asked me if I liked monster closet and I said no and they asked me why not to make it better just tell why if you see it pop tell them why that's how all will be unlock
Most irritating app in the world due to ads Non sense app. Not just so many full page ads which will occupy your whole screen, but also in bw it will start some 30 sec video. And most imp it will open some bad reputation web sites for ads. Non sense
Horrendous DO NOT BUY Having played and loved the Freeplay app,  I purchased this.  Biggest mistake EVER  Graphics and game play,  awful.  Cant even get a refund as just missed the 15 minute deadline.  AVOID
WTF Do you know how to make games or do you ask kids to do this as an assignment
Nice game
No street at all I feel sorry for 1,99  I spent on this. Its not abut the refund but this pack is stupid. Like they never saw any street photography
I hate it It is real good game but it is all game so can i have a refund
Coins and cars gone after update I recently updated and all the coins and cars are set to zero ...That's not done..Other driving games arnt so unprofessional
Still no RARE V8's Adds all in the game now...Crappy gameplay during events using Lte or 3g when Im away from my wifi....Race starts and Im disqualified or the field is halfway through the course.  Unacceptable
What the heck  The notifications STILL DONT WORK. Like the reason I have twitter is to be notified when my fav band tweetsvand stuff like that. And its NOT working. Can you fix it. Then a 5 star will come from me
Help My phone got factory resetting, and I lost all the data.  I had bought 75.000 coins and had shopped more than 90.000 coins and still have 11.000 coins,  but it's all gone after I installed it again.
Doesn't work right As you are playing the right flipper gets stuck on the up position and doesn't release you have to keep tapping it until it does and the left one does it at times also it would be a 5star if they were working right
I CANT EVEN GET PAST LOADING SCREEN If this is because of my phone then i cant rate but ive restarted it and all.I have a LG and it says the name of the game, goes white and stops there. I anyone eles has had the same problem please tell HIM.
Slots Not having much luck
Can't get it to load at all
Sluta iOS design.   Sluta tjata om att man ska ge betyg, speciellt nr man redan gett det.  1
Deutschland Quiz Knnte genauso gut Deutschland Quiz heissen ....  
Doesn't open. This would have 5 stars, but most of the time the app won't open.
Doesn't not record Don't record video pro version
Poor Tapatalk is a much more reliable and versatile forum plugin. Forum Runner crashes regularly, has image cache problems and hangs. Unfortunately there are few vialable alternatives.
HATE IT This game is no fun don't download it please warning do not download this game it takes out the fun of everything
Downloaded the game but it keeps going back to home page. I can't even try to play it. Sucks
Good app
Not happy I used to have this on my iPhone  first thing I noticed was the music changed.loved the old music but most importantly, it took 102 spins before I got free spins 20  out of that I got measly 3500 and I am playing the dream setting
Don't download Paid for and downloaded, it doesn't get past the loading page and comes up with an error but won't even give the option to refund
The issue was the music It wouldn't go away after closing the app or my phone it was weird it just kept playing...
Please fix it. No longer working The app loads and  the place where you can choose Pepa or George  to paint with now only shows a settings button  in the corner on a white screen. There is no place to report the bugs
Kept freezing Kept freezing every time I tried to use the apps I set to a certain orientation
Not happy Just won battle 11 and it went to home screen when the battle was over and say i didnt win it and my dinosaurs i used in resting stage and not happy at all the only reason i keep this is because of my nephew
Unable to do anything I can't add to my collection I am unable to see release dates. I can't do anything
Crashes on ooening Won't open on my HTC one m8, the data Downloads to 100 then it immediately closes, very disappointing, waste of money
Um Few free games and they are NOT educational.  3 bucks to unlock the rest.  I'm not even sure if they are better than the free ones.  Maybe I'm just pampered from having ABC mouse on my tablet for my 2.5 year old.
Still Still not letting me get back onto my old account. I prefer the old Twitter that allows you to get on without extra information.
OMG I hate it that every company now wants money for everything like more then half of the stalks cost 1 dollar wow
Don't Download.. It poses old questions after updates no new addition in questions.Dont waste your time.
Paid app is providing spam messages about German television programme. No, thanks.
No internet.. I cant open this app. It says no internet on my galaxy s3 I9300. But original cricbuzz app work as well. Please solve thiss.
Good..but its shit Too much adds. I like this app but I hate adds. If remove fix this bugs I'll give you 5 stars
Crap widget that does NOTHING good Don't waste your money people  this app may look pretty but it is totally USELESS. It simply doesn't update the time. Style over substance USELESS USELESS USELESS  Can I have my money back please
Wrong tone I loved d app because it's loud bt  oops... It gave me a wrong tone wen I pressed key 'b'... Pls resolve that..
Update fail I updated the game now it no longer allows me to play. Every time i open the game it starts i see my base and the immediately force closes itself.
Annoyed I had to buy this Just so that I could back up my data to move to another phone.  Charging for importexport capability is LAME
It is a nice looking app but it's moon VOC timing is wrong and it does not show the start and end VOC times. As these are important to my use, I am rather disappointed. Please fix this. I have Pro version.
Google Plus photo issue I am able to see my picture but noone else can, I log in through google Plus, is there any way to fix this, also why can't you link google plus and facebook accounts for friends. Please fix
Would not load on Samsung tablet. This sucks
Pieces r too small n thy r not visible. Boring jst wasted my datab
Nothing like other Sims games This game is nothing like the other Sims games. The town map is very limited, and your Sims cannot have a family. The only advantage of this game is that you do not need to have a WiFi connection in order to play it.
Good
Would be nice since its paid version if it could be used for messages as well as messenger. Only good for Facebook all others show links and the other party has to install it to view.
Don't buy Not worth it Very hard to play, instructions are terrible. I've spent over 5 on top of the game purchase. It doesn't save anything for you.
Won't even start. It keeps saying it stopped. Wanting a refund.
Keeps freezing Wont load and keeps freezing. How can u charge for this game. its a scam
Stopped working almost immediately after installation.
Now is the time Ok, lets be honest. The Acer Iconia One 7 has bugs. It just won't work. You really need to fix it. It was working in 0.10.5, but in 0.11.1 it won't work on the Acer Iconia One 7.
Crash fest I can do nothing without it crashing or kicking me out. Otherwise it would be a fine time waster.
Wtf Dowloaded on galaxy s5 just get a white screen. I can add a rifle but that's it just a white screen.
Game won't play Every time I try to play counting the squares on the grid it won't accept my answer.  Please fix
Its good and all needs lefty It really needs a left handed setting I like it but I hardly use it simply because there's no lefty setting . Very unfair
Frustrating lack of control Was going OK but now have reached a stage where all controls vanish so can't make any more progress.
Bike Bikeisbest
Won't launch after the 5.1.1 update. This is the third time I had to change my review. You guys need to buck up.
Cant make bookings In late 2014 the app simply wouldnt load seating and would just hang. Happened on my S3 and same happened when I changed to a Note 4. Whats the point of a ticket booking app if you cant book tickets
It is not that bad The game is somehow.  Why can't we skip the one we don't know. Who so ever created this game should really work on it batter. I wish I never downloaded it. Meanwhile it still helps me with other logo games.
Atrocious app to go with a bad game Loads of lag make the microphones terrible in use. The actual singstar game is disappointing, not playing as well as lips and a poor music catalogue.  Singstar for ps3 looks like it has a far bigger selection.
Too many ads You can't actually play the game because of pop up ads. The developer of this should be ashamed
Used to enjoy this I really dont knkw what happened to the game..i purchased this way back last 2013 and i tried to install it to my new phone now and it does not open.. I hope you could help me out here..
Bluetooth Forces bluetooth on and stays on. Consumes battery life. This app suck
Data hogger When an app uses a fair amount of your data plan and doesn't give you am option to turn it off, it's not staying on my phone, no matter how fun it is
this is a bad game. i buy 150 craps dit not received them, NO REFUND....also play the free craps...again dit not receive my craps...dont download
Change of heart Can't play bonus levels, being told to pay for premium even though I bought this game ages ago.
Marmalade Marmalade error.. Wtf does that mean.  So for 7 I get to play for ten min..  Now what  Refund plzzz
everything is up to date computer version, phone version, tried uninstall and reinstall on both devices. antivirus is off. still wont sync two of my playlists so i can see them in google play. they did before the updates now they dont
This doesn't work I have an awful virus on my phone and I've done a lot to try and get rid of it I did research and everything and I downloaded this thinking it would help but all it is, is a show
Annoying popups  Video Ads What once was a great game is now crippled by intrusive ads, sometimes popping up  right in the middle of a shot
Annoing Every time i try to press a button it dosnt work and crashes and it realy gets on my nerves so whoever hates this and finds it annoing like i think it is i totaly agree on you
This games sucks I tapped things and it wouldnt pick it up there are no good directions in the game like other games like this habe. This game is just crap
Not working now days It's now a crap app. I tried using it several time but didn't work. Not only for me for my friends also. This app was my  favorite, but not now
Awful Use to LOVE it and not to mention I paid for this and now it takes three days to get ONE like. And thats all. My profile is not private and I am waiting weeks it just doesn't work. DON'T PAY FOR THIS. ITS A RIPOFF.
BIASED It would be so much fun to play d game in multiplayer mode. However I see u hv given dis feature only 4 iphones.  Not fair.  Get us multiplayer option and I'll gv 5 stars.
Grown up section still doesn't work Every time I try and log in to the grown up section it's closes the app. That is what I paid for please fix
My connection is always slow, keep saying that try again, I love this game pl do something
Needs fixed You can't hear some of the notes when played I really like the app but a waste of my money if not fixed soon 
Awful Game Basically if you don't go first and you always go last the other players get ALL the fortune cards and ALL the properties. Where's the return option on this app...
Love Stratego Hate screen size Love the game but its almost impossible for me to setup my pieces. The tiles are way to small and makes it very frustrating when I move the wrong piece constantly. Fix that and the game will be awesome.
Jobs are all male Why is that Can't women be doctors or scientists
Crashes My son loves this app but can't play it. Please fix for a 5 star rating.
This game closes every time I open it
Refund When I first purchased this I saw a tab to refund. Since I went out it is not there. I want refund
Loved it, not after getting a new phone. Wouldn't transfer to new phone, even for the money I spent. Thanks for nothing.
Should allow to change country Should at least allow me to configure default country, as I am not in USA, website works better as it at least shows you the weather of last course searched.. App should do the same to deserve a 5 star
Rubbish  Unbelievable lag and constant adds, deleting after 5 minutes
UuGggHhhhh I've had this app for 2 weeks and IT STILL DOESN'T LOAD TO THE GAME  All me and my four year old get is a loading screen.............
Help  I can't play this game because apparently there is an abnormal error in my user account ...I don't understand this  I'm uninstalling.
Cant even play I just downloaded it and it says that it has stopped working every time i try to open it
Not playable Controls are so stupid that i cant even drive for 10 second, also it is really annoying to crash when you slightly touch the cars and shit
Game WAS great... Match ups stopping halfway thru and giving the win seemingly by coin flip...  Uninstalling this POS app...  Do not waste your money on this.
Only good if you buy premium It's not worth it without premium.  I've also had alot of freezes and crashes from the app.
Paid for and no download Says cannot download due to error...
What the fk... Stops every time i opens the app.. even i have not play this game..  sorry for bad english 
Dumb ways to die 2 When I try to open it all I see is a black screen if you were to fix it I will give you 5stars
Wheel of lame Its a joke. 
Change the title Xylophone only...tqvm
Paid version with full screen ads Don't install this apps because it will only sabotage your phone. Banner ads in menu and full screen ads everytime you go through a level or after you quit a stage.
Not Great I did not like this app because you can not do much more than the first thing.
To many adds I hate the adds and whrm i try the other thing it send me home
Won't play Push online button nothing happen everything eles works but not the online button the reason I got app
New update Epic FAIL Ever since the new update, the will not load. It constantly crashes. If I want to play it, I have to first Uninstall then reinstall and finally restart my phone. And that doesn't always work.  Used to be my favorite game
Its crashing again nd again.. Wtf I thght it wld be fun plyng dis game buh its crashing each time i open it.. Its not moving further the main scree.
This is not the playing piano ever this suks It sounds like the first piano game that ever came out
Change simulation Problem with the following link. From the archive is incorrect or any other person.
Doesn't work Gave it all the permissions and accesses and it wouldn't open up to play. Had to delete from my phone.
Akash Akasa
Force close Game crashes after every game and every five freaking minutes in between. About ready to uninstall. And there aren't any goals anymore or challenges Wtf
banyak iklan gembel banyak iklannya n ska ngadet mainnya
2 million limit No need to build houses or hotels because after a few tours, game ends. Cool game but deserves much better...
Waste of time
Live wallpaper showing clear sky when widget saying current weather is cloudy, current city is Dublin, ie
Bad Bad
Game save ruined by this update I purchased the Toyota it's not cheap but after I completed Le Mans and got the Porsche 2015, the Toyota is gone from the garage the Porsche now appears twice. What am I supposed to do now Buy it again for 1000 gold
Not loading News hunt was one of my fev apps. Now days it is not loading at all. very slow. almost useless
It's definitely rediculas I'm just not sure why I need more app's to do the same thing but now let's take up more space... unnecessary
Worstest game I wanted to exit but it started playing at level 1 and hangs always . Ka ,sa game .hi.
Does not work anymore I even bought the pro version  contacted developer.Got NO RESPONSE 
Stupid I downloaded it only because of mcent  but did not get any money
0 star Does not open
Suck. I would actually rate it five stars if u unlock the the mermaids and the superhero and the unicorn
Lonely and whiney He really looked lonely and always whines no matter whatthey should upgrade it and have 2 dogs
  
Hated it. Sab bakvaaas sari phota aadhi aadhi hain
Sight Words Constantly locks up
I hate this stupid game It always crashes specially on my phone and messes EVERYTHING up  don't download at all  dont waste time on it
New art way too distracting I hate hate hate the new art style. Let us play the original game square Bad port all around
What Nonsense Very very very very poor Game..guys I know we should try always some different things, but that doesn't mean u make fool.. Stupids
The more you buy the faster you lose At first I loved this game.  I thought it was different from the rest.  Then they got too big and started to not let the ones who buy chips win.  Uninstalling this game.  Find another game to play.
Uninstall There's no way to set the difficulty. One suit is just too easy. I can win 100 of the time.
Takes way too much time to establish connection.
 It would be better if you could buy land with the coins you earn instead of with dollars seeing how you only get dollars very few and far between. And also the battles are rigged
Just boring The game was pitiful and boring.worms are more fun than this game.
Not good, not accurate, many places missing. Value 1 cent...
You deserve One star for creating a wonderful deceiving bible Where is Matthew 17vs21Niv, Matthew 18vs11Niv, John 23vs14 removed a lot of scriptures, I thank Jesus for giving me the wisdom to use different translations...
Doesn't control xfinity x1 boxes correctly. Channels can't be inputted and OK entered. Drains battery like mad, so be sure and task kill after usage
Sharing Can't share anything from YouTube anymore. Status update fail. So annoying
Can't play it The only thing that this game is doing on my Nexus 7 is loading..... Haven't seen anything else than Please wait while the game loads window 
Don't download I downloaded it and it came up as another person's acount and he had gotten very far
Sucks a lot... Still sucks a lot ...
Sha Easy to play  and enjoy with own music.
Horrible The App Keeps Saying Error And Wont Let Me View Any Of My Followers Needs To Be Fixed
I'm lost There a license part that need to be download I tried and its not taking me to it....I need my 99 back now
Please fix I like the game alot but the button that let you pick a new game, or go to the main menu, COULD YOU OF MADE IT ANY SMALLER Plus a stalemate happens after 10 moves not after 3 moves
The game is busted Totally pay to win. NO penalty for NEVER feeding your troops allows armies so large strategy and tactics mean nothing.  Only thing that matters is how much money spend buying stuff.
Kinda sucks. Terrible sounds, flat level design and a wimpy multiplayer. I kind of expected more out of this game. What a let down.
Not Good At All The Worst Racing Game...
Sort of Because that when you want to read a another one you have to login witch is wrong because I am logined in on my tablet
hey mother of pig can u throw out downloading additional content...it sux like u...bastard game...so long pig...totally sux game...stupid idiot dumb space ape...
Mr Gary Lee Ok well thanking you very much please I would want to like to tell us if you can't even use the language you wood choice not by force be over this Gary.
Very bad. It is just west of money stupid .pagal .this is wrong number. By .p. k ..Godva humara Internet balance west kardea hai paglo nai         by..p.k. aurfbandaya...don't make such bad aap
Ap to gan ki bat vjogcu Gk ka bars ma
Why would anyone pay real money to win fake money It was fun for awhile until I played the blackjack table. I have never seen in my life people stupid enough to hit on 19s and 20s. Unless it's a ploy to get me to BUY chips. What a load of pus.
Have it on dream winnings, I have to spin 50 times before I get a bonus feature. I spun 290X before I won more than 30 in a bonus round.
Don't let your kids play unsupervised. My 8 year old was able to change my Google pasword and charge over 500 in app purchases all through this app. Google wallet team did help me but, the game is set up to spend money.
Shob kutta ra
    
It would be a great game if it didn't crash every 2 minutes.... Galexy Tab 3 as well as my Blu 5.0k Studio crashes, Still no change on both of my devices can't even play cause of crashingfreezing....
Used to be fun It won't let me open the app. It automatically closes when I click it. Fix this or give me my refund
What's the point of the paid version I paid for the app to not have ads, but now I'm being forced to invite my FB friends when the app launches. I will invite my friends when I want to. Don't ask me everytime I open the app.
No details for Haryana... Bad, there is a details of few states neither of Haryana nor of Tamil nadu of anywhere else....
Worst game ever You DONT even get to controll your character and u can only choose your actions you will beat the game in 3 mins.
Clock issue The clock is not keeping the correct time.  Please fix. Otherwise i liked the app.
Problems  Send msgs with 1 tick sometimes when connected to the internet especially to someone with an iphone, sometimes still says online even when not online.
Geemaol.com The duck duck moose does not come on just goes right into  Wheels on the Bus song. My Grandsons wait to hear duck duck moose does anyone know how to fix this as I have this app from iTunes and works perfect
No location You can't select location like other apps unless locations are on and saved. Would be easier to type in suburb and city than trying to save locations first.
why I can't get varification code
Doesn't show up in widgets. Sooo, can't use
I hate this app OK I have to admit it that this game SUCKS Why because you really just have to pay for everything the only thing that you don't have to pay is the lame things. I have to say don't download this app
Aleem khan Very like to chotta bheem my son
Pro I cant turn off the background recording  it will turn on constantly in my pocket or even while I am using the recorder making the files crash.  Any update in the future
Assu Nice game
Not opening Now..  WTF I like the game,  and i like it because i play this game.  Now when ever open the game The black screen appears and nothing happens next.....
so cool It's agood game to the beginers
Decent at best The fact is that it's a typical match 3 puzzle game with an interesting development interface  misrepresenting it as an adventure  or dungeon Crawler  is forgivable,  but charging 3 bucks years after release is crappy
Garbage Only for tvs, doesn't work anyways and full of ads. Don't waste your time.
I hated it I rate. This app. For 1 star
Great ruined by freemium This was a great game until the developers got greedy and freemiuned it to death
Can't cook or fish I purchased this game and Every time I try to go to the lake it brings up a message but I can't read it because it closes out the game fast and now it won't let me shake the pots to cook
Crashes I downloaded this game as everyone said it's awesome. Game open  verify files and then suddenly crashed. I opened again then again it crashed. Very dissappointed
Just another match 3 like we've seen dozens of times before. And if it's working for everyone but not for you did it ever occur to you maybe it's your phone that's the problem and not the app
Fix the app Every time i touch to scroll the app, it goes crazy up and down to the bottom and then i have to scroll back up top. This happens every time i open the damm app. Billion dollar company and  they can't build a better app.
      
So fing irra As soon as i open it it crashes and my phone us 2014 so wtf it aint slow oh and before i forgot if you move to your sd card it crashes even more
Bugs I updated new version and also installed advanced lock and hide the app lock.. But now it's not working properly.. The apps which were locked earlier are also now unlocked.. 
Why does this not work  Scam
Black screen Audio works, cannot see anything though. any way to fix android 4
Error Good app and speedy transmitter. But when i tried to set my photo as avatar it shows fail to get avatar. Why it happens so  Rectify this error then only it deserve 5
Not so good I've paid to play this app, and i was able to play at first. But when i updated it, it cant be opened  please help.
A freeze app Im very disappointed in this app my daughter loves daniel tiger and she got very sad when all the app did was freeze and she couldn't sing her favorite songs..refunduninstall
Horrible It won't make me watch anything and I paid for this app. I should've gotten my money back
Stupid,its game ever
Did not want to close App did not close while using the backbutton. So I uninstalled. Furthermore no live info, ir is useless anyway.
so i just found about this app yesterday .. what's the point of reading a manga from it's 25th chapter  Would've been good if issues had no expiration date.
I hate it I love the princess the boy is ok it is borring lame all you do is put paths in the right place then  you make them walk lame borring stupid don't down lode this game
Worst Always shows connection complaint even all other works also your website the same complaint, but the idea was very good
I really like this game but I can't play anymore it says it needs to be updated before I can play but the update says it's not available in my country HELP please
Send sms but bery slow and lags. Please fix this then I'll give you 5
Wont give me a refund The game won't even install and when I clicked refund it said  Can't give refund right now. Try uninstalling it. I want a refund.
Hate it I was saving it then my whole phone was frozen and I couldn't tap on anything
Game says  Give it 5 stars for free updates  ass Now I got to know how this kiddish game is so popular Try kill shot  Far better grafhics then this asniper
Can't Solve my problem Every time I update this apps I'll facing a problem No SU Binary Installed. After I purchase pro version the problem still exist. Please help me.  Samsung Galaxy Note 3
Horrible Bugs sounds sent that good work on it
Wont give me my purchase I ordered more tickets n it continues to say unfinished purchase and no one has contacted me back. Theres no place to look for recent purchases and overall the purchasing process is not well thought out.
It didn't work for me.I couldn't figure it out so I looked it up and none of the letters that were supposed to be there were there.
Super times poker Video poker has several errors in the payout. I reported them and one was temporarily corrected. When I loaded it on new tablet it scored wrong again. Others were never corrected. No fun to play when things aren't right.
Buggy
No sound No sound help using s5 volume working and other apps work also voice settings set to on also remove app and then reinstalled app same issue using s5 andriod kit kat 5 latest yes adjusted volume up and no sound coming
Crap With wifi on there are ads that pop up and appear at the bottom and without wifi makes a pop up ad freeze. This game was awesome now it's crap
It keeps crashing on me It keeps crashing on me, I want my money back
Its OK but No Nvidia Shield means I can't play it on the device it would be best on. Total fail. Some devs amaze me at how little they want their audience to be.
Receive notification every 5 minutes although it is set to refresh every hour. Become very irritating.
Needs more features for the price... Things like custom playoffs only and gm mode beyond one season.
 D
I hate it When ever I try to do the makeup it glitches on my tablet and if it did not glich I would do a 5 star rating
I've been waiting for cloud service. Finally got cloud service. I've been waiting for a year. However, it looks like they will start charging to backup our data. Service should be free like everyone else.
Hate
Ripoff I buy this app only for them to put out a new fancy one and expect me to pay again. No way Josie
Will give 5 stars if you fix this I have a huge park and now i have to start all over again.. Because i was playing on american server but now i think im on europian server and im not able to change server
New update, new fail I've always loved zedge but now after the latest update I can't seem to search for anything anymore. Every time I preform a search for a ringtone the app begins to stutter and locks up.
Never got to play. I just bought it and i never get to buy games this is the first one i ever got to do and the second i downloaded and opened it, it said failed game licence. PLEASE help me
Not entertaining I dont know why but i cannot seem to do those double moves even though its a forward attack style except for the king. Please fix it.
Used to love this app Now its not reminding me of ovulation and when my cycle is going to start like it used to but I have selected to send me reminders. Is there a fix for this
Epic fail This app is useless
Won't clear codes on my e60 Worked fine before, but since the last few updates, I cannot clear fault codes anymore.. e60 m5 using HTC m8
FREEZES ALL THE TIME freezes and throwing me out from game to launcher especially when I make kill shot. do something if you want 5 stars
Won't work I have selected my topics in which I am interested in at least 10 time and it still ask me again
Dumb used to live but it upgraded and won't work It keeps telling me its unavailable.
 It doesnt give you enough free play. I am unistalling this app. Even the bonus doesnt give you enough for one game Too bad because the show was great and this game had potential
My Facebook account just disappeared off of my phone. Now it wants me to reinstall it. What the heck. First your doing all this freezing and now you completely uninstall all on your own.Very disappointed.
Force closes I love it but it force closes and then all the success etc is lost This irritates me Fix it for five stars
I was not expecting ads and cant refund my money back plz give me my mother ney back
Broken features Been playing for almost 4 months now and it's been pretty addictive and I liked the game, now I can't enlist troop with my enlisting pins anymore, I just get an error message then the game closes, WTF
Very poor I gave them my credit card no and they took 500.00 dollars out of my checking account. So i had to call my bank and report it and get my money back so people don't download this game they just want your credit card so they can rip you off
3rd level Get three keys then that's it one you can't get and the other is no where. Delete wasted money.
Crap I did everything in the direction and still doesnt work. Thank god for refunds
I just need the leaderboard It's got a lot. But all I really want is the leaderboard and the cards and its just constantly force closing  so annoying. Yeah videos and stuff are nice but c'mon THE LEADERBOARD IF NOTHING ELSE
No Animation I was a bit disappointed since these aren't animated.  Nice stickers but not what I am Looking for.
Rip off Just takes your money what a RIP OFF and you have to buy everything character s more levels playgrounds uh WHAT A WASTE OF MONEY DONT BUY IT
Dont waste peoples time I don't have facebook and im not getting it to play a game Put in the description Requires Facebook
When will we get more robots like one from Canada and when is the next up date
I didn't get my coins and the quit a problem with quit button I paid for my coins and didng give it to me and please add for quit button says are you sure you want to quit for now until it fixed it's 2 stars
Vry bd game.. it is third class game..dont lk it
What the hell did you do This last update sucks Everything is slow, server time outs and errors all over the place... it's now unplayable. Can't log in, can't access gear, can't equip anything... fix it.
Kind of boring, not the game for me.
Do NOT buy for HTC One M8 As others have reported you cannot place towers on the bottom row of the screen which makes the game unplayable. Sadly the developer has known about this issue since at least March but chosen not to fix it
Doesn't even work on my lenovo a60
... Really it doesn't work. It let's me record my voice but I can't make the sound its crap.
I hate it I do not like it its not good I wile I was driving a car hit me in back huuuuh .......... I hate it
Shame Really beautiful fun  interesting game but it KEEPS CRASHING After every mission or 2 it crashes. I could be in the middle of a misson and it would crash. This makes me not want to have this game at all. Its a shame.
Great tool but with a catch Was using it on the free verion, everything was ok and fine. Since last update some root features became accessible only with the pro version, that is unnecessary expensive.
Please listen to us We dont wat t wait 3 hours jus for 2 hours passes listen to us or we will tell other kids or teens or whatever that they shouldn't get this game cuase it will suck so fix it now
It won't stay up the moment I start drawing it crashes or closes itself its really fun and I would like to have it but won't keep it unless its fixed
Boring Can't do anything without machetes and you rarely get them.  I currently have 6 tasks  5 require 1 machetes and the other is beyond my level.  Gave this game 2 weeks but it is still boring.  
Dumb All you do is missions for nothing but the computer one seems good but the this game is to get money for computer version
WORST GAME EVER I thought it would be a great game but this was the worst game I ever played. Only if you could've kept it as u will touch the screen and the bots will hit then it would've been a great game. So please make the changes
Level 57 very difficult to play, please update the game so as to be able to get to the next level, adding a ball of the same color but it still go further.
OK It needs more pages you can only do one page in free play mode.What a waste.
      .
Nice one
Give me my money back it was sooooooooo boring I didn't like it refund I want my money back right now
Bad These jokes where all ready done on YouTube wich has more then what is on here if you want good yo mama jokes just go to youtube
Saddam Patel
game force closes after 30 seconds. do not even have time to load waste of money for android zte valet.  Tried developers website.  No info on game for android users, only iphone users.
FIX IT needs turn signals, mirrors,  traffic lights that work, speed bumps,  and other cars on the road fix it
Delayed delivery Since last 3orders products were delivered 23days after the expected delivery date n this is the oder number OD003313773757524700 of bean bag which was ordered on 7th July which is not yet shipped even.
Tomb Raider relic Run Used to be 5 stars till the current update now it crashes on load on HTC One m8 and Tegra tablet  could you please fix I love the game now I can't play it
OH MY GOD My ponies do NOT show up in my gallery, the only way I can get to the app is to go ON the app store, and it is SO SLOW Money wasted
Fucking useless Never finds a old n holy songs only searches movies n popular music
Very Boring 20 Mbs and only a bit features. this is just a waste of time.
Disappointed Worked good at first then it started giving me a blank page and all of the boxes were empty then it got stuck tried restarting it nothing worked extremely disappointed.
Plant picker not working I am still getting three plants locked by dave inspite of completing adventure mode two times. Is it by design on an error
laggs as hell on lg g2 This game laggs as hell on my lg g2 d802 with Blisspop v3.3 Android 5.1 like fps drops from 40 to 15 for a short time...couldn't play much with this laggs, so one star for now
This game is useless Gets jammed right after you close the pause menu
Slot bonanza The game is a rip off. I was playing the tiger game and it froze up just as the diamond was coming out. This has been going on for 2 weeks now. Fix the problem and give me my coins.
Or fix Please make it so I can stream from the website directly because this app has been force closing  on my samsung
Ricky stewart Sucks
This app will not download. It just keeps saying error. Don't waste your time.
I love that
Was a Nice app Doesn't work anymore it won't even load the location map just gives error message
No Facebook login... Means this app is currently useless to me unless there is another way of linking to my account on the desktop site
Overrides screen pinning Pressing the back button closes the app, so as soon as baby mashes his hands in that area, the pinned app closes and the device goes to lock screen.
Horrible The app never plays the music that you choose and when it does play something it just keeps playing and you have no access to the app it goes into a loop where whenever you open it out instantly exit the app
Not working App says update to ver 1.06 I'm on 1.07
Why doesent The Moth respond We are all big enough for this app to be fixed and updated However there is a complete lack of response to these requests. Since my last posting this continues to be a problem. Keeps crashing on razor maxx
This doesn't look as shown in picture difficult to use
Its boring I can't even do more than one recipie and you have to buy them
I realy hate this game ever in my life
Could be a good game but there's never enough resources to actually play for a while you have to wait for machetes you have to wait for money or you have to purchase it with real  money I think I'll stick with Sims FreePlay
Too easy Good game but it's way too easy. I get a fish on every 10 seconds. There's no challenge. I've gotten bored with it quickly
Average Bloody hell the only focus of the maker is on advertisement really fed up with these advertisement
Terrible app Terrible app, search function doesn't work, gives you about 20 games in each category to browse through, want you to pay for games that others have made, really all around poorly designed and not at all worth the money they want for it.
ADD MORE STUFF First it was funny now it's blahh u need new people and other stuff
Don't open Would love a refund.
Letters not avaliable I paid money for this Why is my keyboard on the game all the sudden blocking out 90 of the letters I need to use How am I supposed to play this game I want my money back immediately.
This game is awful I almost deleted this before I even opened it but I decided to give it a chance
Not well done It just kept on loading and I didn't  get a chance to play the game
Too Fast Mark Crilley goes too fast and he should do it slowly so young drawers like I can keep up.
There is no web page with which to enter data This app had so much promise, but data entry via a smartphone alone is not the way to go
Shutting down Paid for this app and it keeps force closing on me....   common guys fix it...  DO NOT BUY THIS GAME UNTIL ITS FIXED OTHERWISE YOUR JUST WASTING YOUR MONEY   If this issue ever gets fixed I will change my negative feedback
Not good for those who cannot see well
Michael fix your app I paid for this app but it does not do what it is built for. My cpu goes up to 1.7 and i have max 1.2 ghz. Thus it does not control my cpu at all.. i have a rooted galaxy s4 unlocked bootloader. If you fix this then 5 stars
Would be nice if it worked Tried to get it to work. But, no luck.
......... Speechless Too many ads even thiugh i dlnt mind but after the ads the game froze like frozen ice
 30 seconds long
RUBBISH This game is so rubbish I hate hate hate hate the game so so so sooooooooooooo much I'll never get it ever ever ever again
Rdio player is LAME Reducing to 2 stars since there are no lock  screen controls if you have notifications set to Hide Sensitive Content in Lollipop.  Amazon Music and Rocket Player handle this fine. LOLLIPOP IS NOT NEW ANYMORE.
I can't play When I go to a game mode it stops plz fix it
Can only play against one other computer player, other wise the ai will always sacrifice one by only attack you. Plus, the sign in feature won' t let you just say no.
Dear Game Makers Have Purchased the game but its not getting installed in my phone. Kindly advise. Am a POP fan. Like to play it.  Thanks in advsance.
Can't even download Wtf I can't even download this game to play it.
Bugs and crashes The new layout is horrible. Everything used to be so simple. It is unintuitive, and it has way more bugs and crashes than before
This game is not running in my micromax a110 Android mobile. This game is not runningopening in my micromax A110 Android mobile
Crashes App no longer works in latest update. Constantly crashes.  Even when it's not running it will pop up and say it has stopped working.
Um yea It works, just not in my messages. Only on social media sites. Kinda disappointing.
OK but I do like the models, but Coach's Eye is a better app.
Keeps turning off in the middle of playing... Which results in crying toddler After paying 7 I am an unhappy mommy
Worse mb of my life I hate it the graphics is horrible Stupid
App won't even open Force closes as soon as I try to launch it
Great App When I initially downloaded the game it worked perfectly. But I've gotten to a certain point an now the game doesn't want to start up, it'll immediately shut down. Having trouble downloading it to my new device same model though
App closes without GPS This is the biggest, most stupid waste of power the developer could've put in. Pull the speed data off the OBD connection. Save the battery power, AND save me the waste of time enabling gps when my phone's GPS is dead.
Crying Son I downloaded this for my son who was super excited, and this game doesn't even get passed the user selection screen.  You've basically ruined our evening here.
Issues So, the king can't move at it's please How's that And after 2 times playing this game stopped when the rate message pops up. Then i couldn't resume the game again.  Plus using almost 90 Mb of ram Really No thanks.
Brb game I hate this it doesn't let me do somthing
No cloud saves While I did enjoy the game, not having some kind of cloud savebackup just ruins it when you move devices, get a new device, have to wipe a device...
Buggy It shows single tick for the Message I sent to my contacts . But they don't receive my messages ... irritating ... wifi3g
It keeps saying my device is either rooted or illegal when I try to play this game. Why's it doing that Fix it please.
Can't load Can't load . pls fix it
VERY NO FUN... Very dissapointed Can't Open it 
Note edge Crashing, not loading articles. When it does bother to load an article, won't let you scroll. Terrible. Need to update your update.
Will not work Force closes when opened saying forever lost 3 has stopped working LG G4. As  most others have stated, I've purchased the previous 2 in the trilogy and loved them. Will give good rating when fixed.
can't cover a nil A partner shouldn't bleed out a suit on a nil bid when the niller has shown a void suit
Acorns I enjoy the game but it is way to hard to get acorns. It's very annoying. Either make stuff cost less acorns or make it easier to get an abundance of them. The game has become worse since the update. Still having issues with the acorns.
I like the tournaments, just can't win very big.
Its nt working
 it changed .... I used to like it but it only seems to get worse. the calls aren't the best quality but I still think its a really good app to have and I'll probably never delete it
Poor customer service Sent 3 emails regarding an issue and no response back. Actually love the game but what the hell do I gotta do to a reply back
Dragging and throwing of dices are not working Couldn't drag the board to left or right when I wanted to go to my property to build houses. Can't do flick the dices as well. Using Sony Z2.
Why I have been charged twice, please refund my money back,  it takes to download too much time,I hate it
Cute but.... Why should you need to pay to do all the games
Keeps disconnecting even though my internet is fibre optic always disappoints
Most stupid app ever...wish i cud give it 0 stars
This... App bilkul bekar hai. Sound quality ekdum bakwaas hai..
Was excellent in the beginning Whenever i play youtube vids it plays correctly but when i turn my tab or cell off then mayb a few mins later cut it back on it closes all the vids i had in the queue and i have to start all over again
The only good part about it is that it makes some kind of sound. It is unresponsive and a utter waste of time.
Ploggingsproblem Klarer ikj logge p Premiumversjonen.. Sender heller ikke passord til epost.
Used to be great Bought this on my s3 mini. Now i have a galaxy s5 and can't play it with no menu buttons on new lollipop OS 
NOT REALLY FULL VERSION What full version still makes you buy the levels. Ridiculous
Still glitches. Tired of uninstalling installing every 5th game. Every. Time. Not. Kidding.
Row issues Can't place towers on bottom row which makes setting up a meaningful maze to stop the enemy impossible and basically makes the game impossible to beat. Used to be a great game when that worked but now is unplayable basically.
Pop ups an ads in game even after buying it. Disgusting.
Fun game annoying ads Watch videos to triple score or I just finished drawing after paying for this app and an ad came up for some game. Why did I pay to remove ads when they're still on here That's shady.
Crashed After Complete All Task To Unlock The Pink House I Love This Game But...After I Completed All The Puzzles To Unlock New Room It Kept Crashed..Please Fix It.. And Make Everything Free..Everyone Were Complaining About The Same Thing Here....
Not fair Can't even connect to the game, I love the ff saga and am starting to regret paying for any of the games because they won't load on my Xperia
Forces closes I try to open it and it closes as soon as i open it, it shows black screen then goes to my homescreen
Doesn't workno refund Didn't work in my samsung galaxy vibrant no reply not refund. Downloaded and paid it again in my ipad. My kids liked it, but shouldn't have to pay it twice
Used over 900MB in data on ads This app used up over 900MB of mobile data in a 2 month period which cost way more with my service provider than a paid version would. App deleted.
Latest Update 118 mb like oh ma gad after downloading it stucks on loading page and never started . best game for me , now its a total trash, UNINSTALLING .no help from developers
It don't work I want my money back
Controller wont work Purchased this due to the fact it said it supported xbox 360 controller the game asks me if I want to use controller then it freezes either fix or refund please
Big time bug Need to fix having real issue. Eveytime I exit comes back and my mp decreased and my name would be someone else. Also everything would be unlocked but no mp to play wtf. Need to fix this bss
not enough smiles for the price 
Good but sms day quota If it would have unlimited messaging I would have given 5stars
weather not so good.
Not bad but............ The chess  the chess needs improvement...........
Crap Umm not mick Foley that's mankind in the mask just saying
Can't accept ToS Seems like a fun game. The tutorial fights were nice, but when I log in and scroll through the terms of service agreement, clicking on the Agree button doesn't do anything. Samsung S6
Help me I had hidden the app and i realy need to change my password because my little sister figured it put. Now she doing things in my tablet that i didnt want her to do. My tablet is a Samsung Galaxy 3
It really SUCKS
Idiots These guys are so IDIOTS.what a shitty game.too easy and boring.hate it.uninstalling now
Fix it I can't even install it
What a WASTE of money There should be a little more animation... you can't bake the cake you just pick stuff, kept my daughter entertained for 2 minutes
Fret board now missing Please fix. Have reinstalled as requested and checked options but it still has no fret board.
help how do i add it to facebook or my messaging app
This game takes forever to download i would not recommend this game for people who have anger issues So there.
NO worky keeps giving me the google play service error constantly when i start the server
Fault alert Love the app but for the last 5 days been getting no arsenal updates see the stream is working on the mobile site though ... Sort it out lads
Rubbish app n website.refund now Team it's really a shame how u mis lead ppl in getting in your loop.have been a month since I became your paid membership and even after complaints and mails the response has been poor .refund the money ASAP
Won't let me sign in Broken, cant even sign in or changerecover password
Not a 5 dollar game Way to short
Garbage
This app is missed up It keeps showing me the welcome to quora page where i choose at least 10 topics... Even though i've done that like 5 times Fix that please.
Why it isn't working I downloaded it last month.it was working good. But now I can even see the marker,planets,moon or even the sun. Compass is working. Please rectify it. I'm using Asus Zenfone 5 Android 4.4.2
Its too zoomed in making it really difficult to play some games, please fix would be good otherwise
Love it I love this game because the baby are  so cuy
Doesn't work on lollipop
Horrible Update I just performed an update and I'm sorry that I did. I've been using Speedtest for almost 4 years and the latest update is choked full of ads. Uninstalling right now. I'll check back in a few months to see if common sense prevails.
I would rate it 5 stars but you can't see anything
Hmm Late sound delivery and also i cant press more than two notes and the sound doesn't match either.
Please I need to save the things I have created but when I going to leave the game it restarted over again. I'll give 5 stars. And the full version of the exploration lite I need to buy it. Do something to it. Please.
I am puzzled Why , do the settings in your app not function like the first day downloaded Fix it please , because it has potential to be a 5. With NO Support
This t.v show has just ended after 15 years, how many questions would that be  Ive had this App a week and already repeating questions, waste of money
Not Responding. Constantly crashes straight after being launched, I  don't even get the chance to choose between 'Challenge' or 'Practice' most of the time.
Glitchy Fun tests but toward the end terrible glitches make competition impossible
Crashes Only just installed, good game however after every 2 races the screen goes black and nothing happens. Almost as if an advert is suppose to load but never does. Uninstalled, will try again in a month or so.
Not working on android wear Since the last update is not working in android wear in my Moto 360. It was by far my favorite app for the watch, with the lyrics and everything. Very disappointed.
Real Bass It's a little slow in response and its only for right handed players. The sounds are a little too synth sounding for me.
Letter school Everything is upside down
Poor service Always saying route not supported. Uninstalling. Its as bad as the train service. What a joke All routes are giving problems..
Worst game This is the most worst game
Not Casting to Chromecast I can cast YouTube, Netflix, and VideoStream to my TV with Chromecast but SB keep saying UNABLE TO STREAM 10... What is the issue Never seen that in the year I've Been casting. Will someone HELP
Ads Ads Ads In the. Way uninstall
Unclear acter payment Just paid to upgrade to premium. Then you have to pay again otherwise you have no access to the premium content... Hate to lose my money that way. Will contact Paypal and see
Insists on linking to google  Sticks google  icon on top line on landscape mode on tablet, no option not to share etc on google etc none of which I want. Previously was good app. Uninstalling due to these changes.
Need more info The company should have told us that the laser doesn't come out the phone....but I got a laugh out of it my dog went pysco when he heard that noise
Laggggg I love this game. I have it on a galaxy s3. I really want a refund though. The game lags so bad now... it's ridiculous.
Needs better picture I don't know how the update is because it keeps shutting down. Please fix I keep getting collections and freezes
Rubbish I am thinking of changing to a new network called Pot Luck hang on I with them already vodaphone
8 app and still doesn't work Every animal she clicks defaults to pumpkin
                   
Bakwaas hai
so annoying that one of the prize bonuses isn't the ability to drop new coins more quickly. this bonus is available on this developers' other dozer games, why not this one
Quora, I mean why Not even able to login with my fb account as well as there is no intent direction to a new activity on clicking forgot password.  Advice  either improve it or just shut it off.
What Happened After the update, everything got deleted. I have no true credits, it deleted all the tricks I've ever done  and it also erased every gap I've done. Fix this and then I'll give three stars.
POINTLESS The only reason I'm giving one star is simply to say WORST APP EVER
What's the problem .. I could not use the aps...
No fun. Gameplay moves like a snail. Levels are poorly designed. Not worth the 99 cents I wasted on this game. Deleted because it is taking up space on my device.
There was a bug once when I press continue it would allow me to go to the phone call but then once I looked at the camera it would go to the home screen PLEASE FIX THE BUG And then I will rate it 5 stars PLEASE
CRASHED Hahaha I just landed my aircraft safely and then boom From an incoming aircraft. I think a rader with the capability to spot other aircraft is much needed. Also add cockpit view. Your game is awesome
not all bugs fix it messin up on bonus rounds cheated me of millons but still like to play till it act up delete it for a few weeks
Nice Very nice for my kid
Rubbish
Annoying It wount let me sign in..i had to change my password severally  but it still, it wount sign in. Dont waste ur time guys its crap
Old version I don't like the new way at all. I think the old one was better in every way.
mixes a little bit of easy with a lot of really hard
Crashes Multiplayer mode crashes as soon as you go to play. Installed on my S6 Edge. Disappointed as I love the card game. I need a refund
Sucks after update I can't upgrade my weapons or armour. Can't restore my health at the resting tent either. But It debits my coins. So frustrating. Pls solve this issue.
Fun It fun but you have to pay for the others
Used it for 7 years n nw i cnt login or reset password
It does not make sense It does not let you set it so it will only opens to your finger print.                   My advice  DO NOT DOWNLOAD piece of junk
I want a Refund 
Nice to play until you happen upon bugs and cheaters And there's a lot of both, making you lose battles you'd otherwise win. The hanging up, not loading and not being able to play, when most events have a limited timeframe is quite annoying as well.
Awesome LOVE IT
Why the low score.. Because I accidentally hit my home button on TAB A tablet and when I tried to go back in, it did not come up to allow me to continue a head to head match.  You need to fix that otherwise the stars are justified.
Have get tile in screen 31 but there is no screen 31 wasted my money good game up till now
Only two games open wish more were open
Hidden objects Way too many ads to make it fun
Takes forever to install After installing you need an additional 140MB download which takes more than the 15 minutes you have to try it out before you can refund the purchase. I gave up after 25 minutes of trying. Lesson learned.
Private table limit I like this game the most but now i dislikes because the limit of private table is upto 20,000 only. I request that the limit must be upto 100,000. So please do something about that so i can resume playing.
Not working. It had some downloading problem. And then it was not supported by my azuz zenfone 5..
Doesn't work. CTD on touch. Moto X 2014. Pretty annoyed that EA is making the same mistakes as tiny studios. GIVE ME A REFUND
Useless application It holds nothing, really useless.
Great Game but... My touchscreen only detect 2 touch points, impossible to complete stop the blood part
The only complaint is the time The time to play three leveLs are 11 HOURS  That is way too long I mean I can't play again till 12 o,clock at night so sucks for us......and plz change the time too 10 minor something I cut wait that long
bug 20 dollar
More trains Great app but really bad of developers to give 1 train only knowing kids will ask parents for the other trains
This game would be better if it didn't keep going to Facebook after each level
I just want to play I am not going to ask friends or buy anything to advance.  I will gladly pay a reasonable one time fee to play as I wish.  Waiting for more lives is ANNOYING Will probably unistall soon.
Won't validate can't open game fix or refund. Very upset 3 year old
Keeps closing I open the app on my sons tablet and it keeps closing after I click on the kitchenliving room garden. 
used to work Was my favourite app. Suddenly does not work. Has the app . been updated
Ugh Well, I swipe across the screen to turn, and it made me either go the opposite way or not turn at all. Plus, when I jump over the water and land on the ground, I go right through. Fix. And there is lag, too.
Crashes The game works perfectly at the main menu, then crashes when loading an episode. I feel like ive wasted my money
I like this app but.......... It doesn't show me how to draw it says check your internet and restart this app but how to restart this app
The app barely works This app will open, but then most of the time it will stop and close. When it does work, it's very slow and I can't save them Please fix and I will rate 5 stars
   
What the heck... Do not understand what is enjoyable about no hint you're playing correctly games. Uninstalled
Mark Doesn't even have Humble Tx
I hate it Worst game ever as soon as I press play it just shows pictures this totally a game that doesn't work all you people that says that it works you are very very wrong you must've been stupid blind
Crap Since 1.8 been very messed up, can't upgrade soldiers or machines, it's asks me to buy 0 gold with 1 celerium in weird coloured text. In fact text all over the game is messed up..
 Useless game
Glitches Do not play this game it has the worse glitches ever  Several people has asked for the glitches to be fixed and they have not fixed them So sad
Freezes to much If they could fix it to were I don't have to take my battery  out every time this game  freezes .. I'd love it ...
Why So i played multi player with my friend and my world called thas world was replaced by his any way to get it back it alzo crashes every 19 minutes  and the world being replaced  its also just his house on a floating block
Guess the movie This game is horrible not only do you have to pay to get hints when you run out of them. The free version you can even download on your phone otherwise I would not expensive 1.99
Riddled With Ads I don't mind ads but this app is severe overkill, played for a while and deleted.
Shayne can't register, something is definitely wrong with this app, you need to get rid of it
Can translate pictures Ever since the recent update in past April and May I'm unable to translate any pictures at all automatically joins all words together  to make not make sense. It also won't recognize all the Spanish text on the picture
I hate it
Wtf It wont open... I thought it would have been a great game...but no matter what i try it wont open...every time i open it it closes itself....Fix it GLU
Ads cause app to freeze This WAS a good game, but in the latest version the game freezes every time it attempts to show an ad, and I have to force close and reopen to keep playing.  Not worth it to keep installed, too much of a headache....Goodbye
Like the worst game ever The players don't even steal the ball from the players even though I go right in em and the title doesn't even match the game
very bad
Fun game but... The ads are just annoying for a paid app. I also don't like receiving notifications without an option to turn them off.
Very poor game Bad graphics. Just try to plagiarize Temple Run. Keep in mind, do something new. Nobody can win by duplicating other successful game. I am uninstalling just now.
I hate this stupid game This he is to stupid they doesn't wait for me I like piano tiles better then this stupid game
Couldn't even start playing because it wanted to connect with my email account but every time I clicked on my email, it just sent me back to the same thing to do it all again. Run around. No thanks.
Can't get through the phone call One huge bug it keeps kicking me out plzs fix it then I will rate 5
Note 4 keeps crashing Not sure what's going on but the app keeps restartingcrashing every minute on my note 4  m1 combo.
This game would not let me get 3 stars when I had a good record and it has so many ads you can't buy the cars because you have to buy them online which makes me mad so I chose a 2 I hate this game it's so stupid whoever made this is a idiot
Fraudulent free delivery Unlike amazon, even if your cart value is 20lakhsgreater than threshold  usually Rs. 499and if one cart item is from another dealer you will be charged shipping charge for that item. What a silly business logic.
Doesn't work My son was so excited to use this app but as soon as we started at the home page was blank and it wont work
Too waste Don't download
Does Not download It won't download at all
Not working This game has always worked and recently every time I open the app, it just closes out. I'd love to have it working again
Fun, but only 12 levels This had some fun levels, but only 12 of them before I had to buy something.
Don't ever download this game This game gives nothing what is advertised
Stupid controls It goes left fine but won't go right enough to take the corners properly waste of money
sucks you have to pay if you wanna do tournaments and other stuff right off the bat..deceiving
This app stinks don't u people know different brands are in different parts of the country How are we supposed to know when from a different area. Really
This is not very good
Charged me 3 times for the same game Charged my debit and phone account a total of 3 times did not say purchased either then days later it gave me the option to download it I emailed them they did not help I will be going to the BBB about this
Stop with the same notifications Yes I know I have the game installed, I do not need my phone to go off every 2 minutes 24 hours a day reminding me that this game is there.
Will not even finish downloading Tried several times and would give up after 20 minutes and getting stuck at the halfway point
DONT INSTALL IT
Wierd The founder must be fool. Because he doesn't know what exactly is a tabla set. The sound varies in a different way between the both tablas. No clarity of the sound. Hate this app.
My game won't even open up after the last update. I would like to see a hero or gem reward for this huge inconvenience
Unfortunately, since updating it to the latest version, it can only record STATIC. Tried reinstalling the app, but it  got worst.  It used to work perfectly on my S3,  but it failed miserably on my Note 3
NO AUTO ROTATION ,NO QWERTY KEYS IN TABLET APP IS NOT COMPATIBLE WITH AUTO ROTATION IN MY TAB ,IT SEEMS TO BE ONLY FOR PHONES AND IN THE TAB IT BRINGS THE MOBILE PHONE KEYPAD NOT THE QWERTY, TYPING THE FEEDBACK ITSELF TOOK 10 MINS
Creepy The game is creepy and will randomly say something even though you didn't say anything and it takes a while to respond and repeat  what you say.  It's not   an app that I recommend that you get
power button is gone. stupid yes. the power button is gone since update. that means i am unable to access my slingbox when i am not home. please fix.
Keep shutting down Every time I open this app it just shuts Down without even starting, not happy considering I have paid for this app, I have done a system clean alsoand it is still happening..
Doesn't work on Galaxy Tab 10.1 2 This game works on my phone without a problem, but fails to launch on my tablet. Ive uninstalled and reinstalled yet the same thing happens. Please help.
Game is not working properly on Nexus 72012.It takes too long to start and hangs frequently. I am not at all satisfied with the game.
Crap The free one was good. .. but there is so many prablems with this... my crap didnt import... only have two buttons at bottom... its been months since the last post... y cant u fix this... plus update more elements  would b awesome. ..
Don't seem to work I paid for the upgrade can't find videos is not reading speeds or showing any warnings Galaxy Note 4 edge please I want a REFUND
OK but developer does not support Android The iOS version of this app has many more coloring books available for purchase. The developers of this app clearly do not value their Android user base enough to give them the options available on iOS.
Stupid It really is a dissapointment I read the description and was hoping for something more than what it is
MOGA NOT WORKING I got this game esspesialy to use with my moga BUT IT IS NOT WORKIG I HAVE PAID FOR THIS APP NOW AN AM FURIOUS THAT I HAVE BEEN CONNED LIKE THIS FIX IT 
Dislike it Good phishing game with good presentation, but no Google Play Game Features, no Google Cloud Sync, and poor back button support can't close game.
Not very good Other shooters out there are better.. Controls a little unresponsive and not enough power ups to make it interesting..
        ,     
Won't work I held for 2 hours over a code didn't do anything please fix
Constantly Crashes Used to work just fine and it was great to play, but now it crashes all the time and I can't even get through one level. Please fix the bugs
WOULD GIVE 5 STARS  BUT WHEN I GO IN TO TOURNAMENT  I GO  DO MY FIRST BATTLE IT WORKS THEN IT GETS ME  THIS THING THAT SAYS THAT CONNECTION PROBLEM AND EVEN THOUGH  I HAVE GOOD WIFI PLZ FIXS
Worst app.Don't waste your time getting this app. It doesn't work at all even when I press the buttons.Whoever call people idiots about them hating it are so out of their mind.
White screen White screen during rain
Getting boring. It's more about pay to win than ever now. Used to be fun until I got to the caves which is a complete waste of time. There's just too many stages and I don't get to use my own birds only. Come on
Unable to add neighbors I'm connected through Facebook and it won't allow me to add neighbors via Facebook. Can't do some of the challenges because of this. Fix it or I'm deleting this.
Rubbish Took ages to get in as kept freezing with ads, when I eventually got in first game quantity didn't even work properly couldn't see all the squares, even with turning phone will b unistalling game waste of money
Waste of Time No sound recorded.... I tried many times but... Not working on my Mobile XperiaJ
Glitchy I love the website and had no issue paying for a mobile version. But, it loads slowly or not at all, crashes frequently, and I have to resign in each time. Disappointing.
Disappointed I loved playing with this app with my kids But then Google updated my nexus and now it won't work So, now I have paid for an app that doesn't work  If you have a google nexus tablet, don't bother downloading
So it didn't work I heard its a great game but it wont let me play
Hated it Agree this game really is bad, and soooo boring takes so long to download  What
Fix your damn game before you put it up it up on playstore Aye try an fix your damn game nah ...every time i want to go on d game it starting over from d beginning. plus dis game us BULLSHIT so don't waste your phone memory on dis wannabe game
                      
What Its fun I've played it with my friends before so I decided to download it on my phone. It downloaded fine but won't get past the first thing that pops up and I can play it.
Too many ads You keep getting ads and you have to pay for each level
Says licence expired Just bought the app and plugged it in to my colorado and says i need to pay for the licence and by directing me to the help on your website wont help much because you fail to reply on there too
wth its stuck on the welcome to farm village page n wont load game i havent even had a chance to play the game
Sucks Forced closes every single time I used it Nothing better than walking in the dark and your flash light doesn't feel like working. Left in the dark too my times. I INSTALLED
No live results Very disappointed that I do not have live results
Completed the free offers and it didn't work I completed alot of the offers some didn't get credited others I completed for swords and got credited for gold instead , everything expensive swords so hard to come by this thing stinks
In latest version lock functionality is not working properly in LG G2 Only for first 23 times an app will get lock.Otherwise i need to lock and unlock the phone to lock an apk.
Cant buy the Premium app directly from my phone keeps on poping up as critical notification. Please help
Good app butt.... I still cant use the flash option they need to add that. Also the whole you have to buy most of the guns is crap. I had a ton and when I got a new phone I couldn't back it up like I did my other games so I lost everything
Not accurate at all I just passed through 3 speed cameras and not one of them registered on this app. Great for notifying you of traffic though. ..
Multiplayer Not Working Multiplayer was working when it first came out, but now it will find two other players but won't go into game PLEASE fix guys. Guys are you there
Cannot capture nor import videos App keeps crashing....useless
Hateit Itcost alot of munny
Why i can't see all my mention. There's a notif but i can't see the mention come in. What happen Please doing something 
If app uninstall directly msg n all opens Problem is if this app uninstall den all opens like message, WhatsApp, contact n all please solve it
Lol Your end user agreement.... We must accept in order to play a pinball game What a joke.
Dark souls meets temple run. I love tomb raider, but am finding it very difficult to like this game. Touch response is slow and sluggish and half the time you can't see an obstacle quick enough to react to it anyway.
no more mpoints MPoints had been down. Finally got new questions, but the fun is gone. Bring back the mpoints or I'm out.
No longer works I rarely let my young one play on the tablet or phone. This game her favorite out of two. And no longer works since update. Unhappy toddler.
Bad always bug Its cool your games release evey months,but too bad evertime I buy, always have bug.And this time,after julia taking julia in a party, it have bugs which EVERY STEP I TAKE, it went to battles.WTF please fix this Not worth of paying
Disappointed The game started out good now it won't let me in the app had to redownload and when I did it let me in but when I tryed to connect to facebook it keeps shutting me out must fix then I will give a five star not till then
I would give 5 stars if I can set my own time for the games
NO GROUP CHAT My classmate and I wanna chat together and there is no way to do so..please add back group chat
Useless App With Book cab feature even you can't open the app of uber, ola, tfs. It will just bring you to the play store.  The offer discount are just the referral code to earn money. No use of this app.
Not a good game You can only paint 3 nails and then you have to get the full version to get everything else. Thats bull crap
Its a great game but I am fed up of having to reinstall it and losing all I have done..have reinstalled this game 3 times today already ..not reinstalling it anymore going to find another game..fed up now
Marsha Fun, could use better instructions on use of help pieces, had to figure out most on my own or stumbled onto them.
Don't waste your time App doesn't work. It's now 1633 and I am searching for the next train on my route. It gives  me the first trains of the day what I am looking for. The ads make it virtually unusable
Won't open Comes to the screen and says loading and goes no further
In app purchases inside a paid game Guess that is fine when you get the money but not others. Refunded
Fake apps It show pass word is not cottect and change password is not working plz frnd dont install it fake apps . not support recharge 
Princess  makeover for girls This game looks fun to me 
Couldn't see 50 puzzles I could only see 5 or 6 puzzles in this and it wanted me to pay three dollars for more. Meh Refunding and sticking to the free ones.
Waste The baddest cricket game ever
.......Speechless The game froze or it didnt but the ice pack wouldnt move over any event or action
Game takes too long to find another rider to race.works fine when just practicing. Decided to change to 1 star waiting 10 minutes for a rider to race and nothing obviously not many people playing this game.
It say There is some error in my account and game automatically shutdown please fix it so I can play it online also.
Bad I hated it because its lags and turns my screen black
Danee Hi danee  you  can't do theFUN.
Its a bit poo... There is no learning aspect to this game.. has some okay songs but you can play the song by pressing one key throughout.. would rate it 1 star but I didn't HATE it.
Hate it
Token bs Can't reload now even after signing out
Game doesn't even start Connecting to server WTF  I verified my age and after that its loading and loading and loading. This game is taking too much time to connect to a server.
Doesn't work. Stupid cheap rip off game that constantly froze my phone. Pathetic intrusive add pop ups also make game unplayable.
Doesnt work well The apps music and talking do not work well sometimes scrambles. App quits working alot. Wish I would have stuck with the free version.
Kinda done with your new found Fakeness. ESPN very disappointed you think the bravest athlete is one with lots of money and sexual confusion.  That is bravery  Cutting back on you.
Some of the keys don't play Dissapointed keys will not play on sony z2 xperia d,b and f keys have no sound. Please fix
Game runs great but none of the subtitles or txt shows up so its impossible to know what choices I am making. I am playing on a s3 but like I said the game runs smooth so if they fix the txt I will give it a five star.
This game is nothing but a money racket. This kvk is only a means to get you to spend money to replace what you lost. You can never grow because of these kvk events.One of the sorriest game I have ever played. Don't waste your time or money
It doesnt give you the free credits..
CRAP It's a cool idea but constantly tells me the GPS is inaccurate and GPS lost. Was considering buying the premium but if the free one can't even keep my GPS accurately not gonna pay 10 bucks.
Not my cup of tea but its okay
Very poor. Functionally it kinda works but you only get half of the menu icons along the bottom and there is no Android Menu button even though the app tells you to use it to create favorites. Very poor standard of build in this app.
It's a store first and a game second I sincerely hope this whole F2P model goes down in flames.
Ads block buttons You can't proceed to next menus or games cause adverts are in the way of buttons. Really How stupid
It sucks This game sucks it only lets me play mini games and when i try to get the girl into the emergency room it tells me its not working. Its like why make a game  if its not even going to let you play So if i were you i wouldn't download it.
Horrible I got this because it labeled the notes. I thought it would help my six year old who is learning to play the piano. Unfortunately the notes were labeled WRONG Useless
Hangs on s3 Poor interface
Can't play As soon as I got on it disconnected me and before I even got on an ad came and it also disconnected me. Please fix and I'll rate 5
It is just rubbish after few days of service. It does not work. Don't buy it. Don't buy it.
Worst....these guys just copied from subway surfers....don't waste your time on this
Keeps crashing If it wasn't crashing nearly every single time I try to play it, it actually would be pretty good. Until it's fixed, one star it is.
I want my money back I start to download the game and then it tells me there's an error and there's not option to refund
App doesn't work App doesn't work after installing new version
Woooooooooow nice game
Boo x pop
very bad game do not download
Bad gameplay The only play that works is the long pass, you can't get past them on a run play, and the receivers don't catch the ball on a short pass I thought this game would be fun but it sucks, really disappointed.
In app purchasing It runs but it freezed. I prest it as fast as I could... and it's still not working. DUMBEST THING EVER
Played only once Game is very good but i can play it only once 2nd time it takes me to my home screen i cant play this on my micromax unite2 A106 please help me if possible
Global trade HQ Please improve global trade hq system.. If I want to buy anything I'm not able to buy it... It shows it has been sold out please make something strong like HAY DAY
Not working After 2 levels always getting the message that unfortunately game has stopped.. good game.. but not allowing to play
It needs doxing It starts of to fast it should start of slow and it's hard to eat a bigger shark is always beside it
Broing It so stupid I like someone else not jeb
Fun but frustrating Why do you lose blue diamonds when in animal form  750,000 is very hard to achieve.  You fall or trip 1 time the points you've earned are taken away..whyim going to uninstall..cant move forward so whats the point
Attention N'achetez pas un cadeau premium pour un autre utilisateur. Je l'ai fait et l'utilisateur ne l'a jamais reu. Le support client n'a pas voulu rsoudre ma demande... A bon entendeur...
I can't access the guild button since update and now when I try to login the say no server list and freeze there, please fix it. But like the game
Please fix the game The game is brilliant but keeps crashing and sends a message stating unfortunately the amazing spider man stopped.. I Uninstalled and reinstalled 3 times, still keeps crashing. Either fix or refund me.
No maps I purchased this app about 1 year ago and thought that was it. Well now it is asking for me to purchase it again. Uninstalling it now. Waze far better.
Give me a refund This game is the worst game ever I want my money back
Horrific Terrible. It suspends every account I make. Why I made a mistake on one account. And it won't give me another chance. Deleting this right now. em3 is scum
On galaxy s6 edge Not the best voip app. Doesn't integrate with phone call log or contacts, crashes most of the time while in use or switching between WiFi and 4G.
Can't even play it Lags so much that it ends up force closing on Nexus6
Hated it Beware if you skip it takes away points and some pictures do not match the actual movie like lion king and terminator dont match at all
Boooo You have to sub on YouTube just to get 100 coins and twitter and Facebook I don't have twitter or face book they just want more people to sub and to follow them  if I was you don't get it 
Crashes Alot Used to be useful, but after a while the app would start crashing, and now I'm lucky if I can have remain open for more than a minute after choosing to not rate it.
Will not load Cannot get past start up, can't find crash report. Can anyone help please 
Game stops After I rated the game it keeps stopping. I reinstalled it I can't even get though a player turn very unhappy
No notifications I never know when someone calls me, no notification and phone doesn't ring. It's been this why for a year, this app is not reliable at all. Needs tons of work and their's no why to call magic jack
Controls are...not so good. The game looks great but the controls make it almost impossible to control a ship or character. They aren't responsive at all. Overly sensitive sometimes and unresponsive other times. Not consistent.
Loved it... until yesterday. It had been a fun game... until yesterday. It quit working and now the app tries to open but can't. Sad as I enjoyed it.  FIX IT PLEASE
Update force closes. Since the update every time I open the game it force closes right away. I just spent 20 on coins and now I can't even play the game. Fix and will give 5 stars. Galaxy s5
Overpriced I wouldn't recommend buying the additional puzzles. Way overpriced  The entire app is 'free app' quality.
Piece of crap game. You will reach certain levels that are unbeatable. Since collors of the balls are generated at random you may never get lucky. Stuck at lvl 113. Uninstall
Too many pop up adds.
Doesn't load. Does everything but let u play Please fix.
Bbm messnger Won't let me register my user name even when I put random crap in over and over keeps saying user name is taken
I'm stuck on level 6
Lost my Game I Got A New Phone And I Linked The Accounts I Spent Like 6 bucks on this Game This Is Why Nobody Downloads This Game Because Giants Software Is Thieving
App doesn't open It's doing the same thing to me... force closes... how do we get our money back
Lost everything after update So i updated it and hadnt check my pics, few days later i do and EVERYTHING is gone. Over 2000 pics disappeared. How in the world does that happen
Boring my baby
Add more animals and biomes. The game gets boring after a while. Add more biomes and animals. Also, make the map bigger.
Does not work...the web link needs to be updated i guess..
Hate it. I cannot even read my messages.
Very Bad Support Can finally play after getting new phone. Shame on the developers for not even responding when I could not play on previous phone. Obviously all they care about is making money. Wish Google or whoever would ban developers like this.
DOES NOT WORK What a total waste of money.  Nothing on this app works.
the new graphics sucks big time. It's difficult to differentiate symbols. Also maybe some of the old expansions groups should be included on the app now. Also I want online matches like in iOS.
Not working on Android 5 Used to be fine until my nexus 7 updated to android 5. Please fix
Meh, I recently have taken interest in anime and mangas but I really hoped this app would have stories to read for free, ugh I heard a ton of good reviews from friends but was disappointed
Mt Nextbook 8 is not compatible with newest version. I paid my only dollar for this game and I can't even downloading the newest version because it says my Nextbook 8 isn't compatible. Wtf
Fuck you Fuck you and your anoying ads 5 ads in 3 sec Do not instal this crap
SUCKS It's bad
Stupid No body get this game its a waste of time hate it freaking stupid game dissent work and gives way to many ads every second
Ok My  little sis loves it but she says that the makeup disappeared at the end and there's not alot of dresses and hair  and hair color
Iski Maa ki chut Ye  kya chutiyapa hai
IT DOESNT EVEN WORK GOD DAM IT Today I almost got my self killed and almost got stitches well I didn't AND THIS IS NOT WORKING IM UGH ULL SEE WHAT ILL DO ULL SEE
Won't work with Android 4.2.1 Really enjoyed it until this latest update. Now refuses to do anything. Have uninstalled and reinstalled it. It's dead
Screen locker We need a screen locker Please
Love but new update ruined it Ever since the new update it won't let me log back in through Facebook so i can have all my old dice again 
The game features  are black The game was good for awhile but now all i see is black shadows and thats it note 4
Need multiplayer on different devices This app in the apple store has a multiplayer function where you can play I phoneI phone.. please get in on that. Cant be too hard. 5 stars once you can crack that one
My phone overheated The app looks really nice and it's free, but is really heavy for my phone and it overheated after 30 minutes
Progression sucks Seriously.  6 hours wait between training Everything is too expensive for rewards given.  Fix the progression of the boxer.
Unforchnetly this gam has been stoped This game is no good becase this game is autometicly has stoped     plese don't west your mb nd time     thanks
WTF Doesn't even show numbers, gives me random letters and symbols like FL and A. Beyond useless.
Hate it This game is not opening in My cell. . .I'm uninstalling it
Won't load up to play at all just shows a black screen then stops
Change the background color of it or make a like template of different colors we can change our background too. Sick of seeing blue...
So many adds While using this app on my phone i am getting so many add and they are so irritating and also they are irrelivant..can you guys work on it and remove just to make this app a better app to use.
It's for kids only
Completely inaccurate Have been using this for a week now and it always says my wife is miles from where she is actually at. She is at home most of the time. We use Glympse to view each others location and this cm family app is completely inaccurate.
It won't give me a refund
Super
Dont play. Dont download. No one to play with online. Expensive a fuk. Some levels fukin infuriatingly   impossible. So many glitches. I hate this game.
Does not work with latest iTunes Would have given this 5 stars but it doesn't work with the latest version of iTunes. Anyone have any advice
Always change icon location Every time when restarting the mobile. Icon place changes. It's been happening for every update. This is s4 .Please fix it.
I gave this app 5 stars now it gets 2. Please fix the update and let everything go back to normal. Can't see stories or anything. Went from the best to the worst
Payment fails Why isnt this linked to my google play account
Crashes I used to love this game so much, just downloaded it in my nexus seven and it crashes, so much
After new update game freezes and you can't edit base before war. Fix or I'll quit playing
Not enough In the free to tell if I like it to pay for it
Not enough storage ...and I have like 100 mb Plz fix
Crashes Droid Nice tune and wallpaper but thats all this app does before it crashes D2g. Yay.
Malia Tatum
Zero stars This game hasn't worked for awhile,  force closes before even opening.  I just did an update, still doesn't work.  Using Samsung Note 3 Lollipop...whatever I think my kid has finally outgrown Angry Birds anyway...
No tech support I paid money to play but when their server no longer allowed me to play, there was no one willing to fix it and allow me to log in. They literally stole my money
Help The game was working just fine until I downloaded the Epos world. Now it just wont open Better do something
Want a refund...5 games into season now unplayable Crashes 5 games into season..no option to report
a shit of shit app close ur apps if cant make a correct update. everytime problem with this shit apps
Frustrating Finally got it to install. Then it force closes. Then shows not installed.  Uninstalled it. Now won't reinstall.  Grrr Frustrated
Shit vry bad game Its maker is mad
Game cannot play After complete 2nd phase of download the game became black screen and will clash. This is  pay the game for nothing, please fix it.
FIXED BUT THE MULTIPLAYER IS STILL BROKEN On my lg g3, if I try to play online, if I find somebody, the game will crash immediately.
This app really really stinks...had 2 report  more than 1 time,just keeps shutting down not worth it I play games 2 relax NOT to add more stress 2 many other games just like it
New Controls Terrible Gameplay was great before the latest update. The new tap and drag dpad is awful. Very difficult to walk around and go into doors.
your last update slowed my cameras and cannot access some of them. Tje last update stopped my cameras on note 2.
description   is showing as garbled text,force closes often, Asus tablet
No money to buy some bullet This game is good but it needs some enhancement cuz you cannot play it if you run out of money and bullet..
This game sucks you cant here no one talking back
Bonus spin shut down Every time that im in the middle of a bonus spin and winning big the game shots down plz fix and you will get a higher rateing.
No ullu banaving
Hate it Why does it give u one side  bout to throw my brothers tablet
Device gets very hot Game makes my phone and tablet very hot and kills my battery  100 to 0 in 2 hours
Hate this game....This game is only for kid....temple run is more enjoyable than this...
Rip off I've completed tons of offers and not been credited for them. DO NOT DOWNLOAD RIP OFF GAME
Wont restore my purchased full version on my new phone and tablet I paid the 4.35 for the full premium version on my last phone and i had got a new phone and tablet and would like to play it on both but it wont restore my full version
Shame I really wanted to play this but since I downloaded ep 2 now the game won't start period I want a refund.
It won't let me play stick on loading screen saying update failed
Will not open on my nexus I sent a message to the creator but received no reply. I would like a refund if this is not going to be fixed.
Stealing is bad You know this is just a copy of another game. Nice steal cause dishonesty comes with bad results bro
Kbc I liked this game. It helps me to test my IQ.
Dumb Its dumb that u can only play 10 levels.. All they want is your money.. I'm installing it cuz waste of time
Rubbish Graphics sucks n don't even mention the controls
Cannot get it to open I have an LG G3 and it will not even let me open it no matter what I do. 5.00 for a little frustration. Thanks.
Link Local doesn't work I've been trying to trade pokemon on Pokemon Silver on this app. It is being met by a ton of errors. I paid money for the upgraded version and might get a refund. Please fix this
Boring The aiming is way off and the bottle breaking sound is not very convincing. Good idea but correct the aim.
Lol Once downloaded... i start it and it say is an unauthorized in ur android device lol plz fix the problem.. or else it is really not suitable for my phone.. im using samsung galaxy mega here...
Ads Really I bought this app because I wanted to avoid the ads, not get even more ads Plus, the game now lags nonstop on my HTC One. Please fix these issues already
Keeps on closing FIX IT NOW
great game buggy app great game too bad I can't play it on my Acer since it enjoys freezing more than running wasted money
Pathetic money grabbing app Requires a R149 annual membership to use the app.  That even after paying annual handicap network card fees. Pathetic, shove the app...
Everest is missing The description says that you can play with everest but you can't...unless I am missing something Please fix as my son is quite disappointed as he loves the new pup. Thanks
Does not work Bought yesterday tried to use it in my corsa, did not work. It keep saying it has expired and need to buy in app purchase. Waste of money. Please refund
Nggak friendly Berat banget, kurang simple, koneksiku lancar, tp baca 1 manga 25 menit  OP tak ada pula
No instala no Nexus 4 Baixa o mapa do Brasil, e na hora de instalar da erro
Stopped working not able to change Backup Path in External Storage Card
Confused about the maps I bought the topo map version so I could get the trail maps, but all it shows is an area map, no trails. Not even a trail head. What's the point Trying to find help or faq online.
Constant Crashes Ever since the update July 13th can't connect to server, failed connections to host. Was an okay game for the day and a half I had installed... Hopefully they'll fix or its back to the play store 
Ads, too much. Also, asking for a rating before you can even use the app Bullshit. The fact that it did not work for me on over 4 devices might be my custom ROM's fault
Sucks
Doesn't work at all The game doesn't work at all It loads half way then freezes  would like a refund
I cannot register a new account Nothing happens when I try to register myself
Crashes are ruining the game Really enjoy this game. Was about 1000 in the first one and it seems every few online matches it freezes and I lose the game and a war spirit. Will change rating when it's fixed.
Went to the recruit part first time playing the game and it keeps crashing at that same part every single time. I am using a Kyocera hydro life
Waste of money I bought this thinking it'd be fun and I'd kill a few hours.  Turns out it's the complete opposite. It crashes every few minutes. I can't make any progress and I want my money back
DON'T DOWNLOAD THIS. IT DOESN'T WORK. DOESN'T EVEN GET PAST LEVEL 1. YOU HAVE BEEN WARNED. COMPLETE WASTE OF 35 MEGABYTES.
Had to download it twice..... so damn bad I'm angry I had to download it twice makes makes me angry to because the lag problems are major I'm so angry.....
Broken on Lollipop Widgets are not resizable on lollipop. The 4x2 stupidly defaults to 3x2 why which you must resize to 4x2. Even this is no longer possible. With some more investment this app could be great. Right now its very unpolished.
Not working Game crashes or stops working every time I try to open it on my Droid Turbo.
Well This is freaking junk dose.not connect to Google says no files to download and then if you try to backup bookmarks says no bookmarks found then if you email this guy who made this junk he will not reply
Widget broken since last update My widget deleted itself from the home and when I put it back now it always shows Auckland even though I have Wellington selected as default
Latest update It was working fine til the latest update. I try to open the app and it closes on me right away. Uninstalling if I can't use it anytime soon. 
Beast quest It would be a lot better if you didnt have to pay for new worlds

If Ill give it a 5 star if you fix this. It works well but sometimes it didnt recognize my strokes or touch. How can i replace my highscore if i die in the middle of the run or even in the initial. Thnks
You cant choose letters that you want, it's like they're greyed out. But it gives me the same 5 letters to choose from Kinda lame.. was excited to play this but now i can't  
Wheel of Fortune It freezes to much and sometimes after I spin the word bank comes up with no available letters for me to pick needs to be fixed
Keeps pausing I never even got a chance to play the game because it pauses right in the middle .
Doesn't work On HTC one m8
Lag Needs performance improvements. Too much lag, and it does make the game difficultpractically unplayable
Sabse jyada bekar game don't install it totally time waste and ak se kam star dena tha
Used to be really good now not working.. Just see the binary mill logo then black screen..
Not the real sound Slow and fake voice
Eh Glitchy and to repetitive it gets boring after awhile. Now emilys taste of fame and sequels are great. Never gets boring.
Eh Li ke aviary as a whole... but these extra packages seem like scams.
Great App but  Always consumes a lot of Power This App runs in the background even After you Exit the App so it keep draining the Battery. If they fix the power consumption issues Magic Jack would be a great up to call US  Canada for Free
Can no longer use home2 launcher alongside solo launcher, that needs to be the default but I keep getting the error failed to set solo launcher.
I wish I could play it but you can't see anything while playing it because it's practically all black hopefully they fix it.
hahaha car game its an add game...
Wont recognize my heart monitor My heart strap will not be picked up by this app Works with every other app I have tried
Plz fix soon Too many problems after the last 2 updates. I'm on the endless level and can't seem to get past the 24 hr countdown. It always shows 23.59.59 on the countdown.
Strange keyboard behavior Keep getting symbol keys. Nexus 4 wAndroid 5.0.1
Ads in paid version. Used to be ad free.
Mean That is so booring i downlaod it because i want gold in dr driving
Wont download Paid for it.. download got to a megabyte left and stopped.. refunded and retried.. same deal..and now wont let me refund so im stuck with a purchase that wont download.
Useless Iss and comet lovejoy in completely the wrong position WTF
Latest updates are no good I cannot open any pictures or view any videos. Seems like it takes forever to reloadupdate the posts. I've tried uninstalling it and reinstall it with no luck. Seems like each update makes it worse than the last.
All I see is ads Possibly the worst game I've ever played, every 5 seconds there's an ad pop up, and you have to work around the ones that are permanently on the screen. Don't waste your time with this one.
Download paused I bought a game which i can't play apparently, i want to go on second stage, but there is content that should be downloaded, and it constantly says download paused even though I'm on wifi.... Fix it please
Good but This game is good but it makes me so frustraded. And you could add in some new things like you get more money to purchase things.
Ok Theek th
U need to get your shit  together I doesn't let me login unless I subscribe to a fucking free app
Doesn't load on tablet Don't buy yet it doesn't load its just a black screen and forced closing all the time on my lenovo 8 tab I'm very disappointed even sent report and nothing from the developers after 2 weeks
BLACK... I PLAYED IT ONCE THEN IT WAS ALL BLACK
Doesn't Work Every time I open the game. After it says connecting.... The game closes automatically.                                                     I will rate fairly if u fix it
too slow Lose the animated background and try to grab some performance back
Worst pay to play game Paid money for the game and every time I roll the dice and move the game exits. I open it again and its the computers turn it rolls and moves then game exits again. This needs to be fixed now or I want a refund for this game.
Lot of advertisement
Boring We go to now a new game... Such poor English.  Can't buy a vowel during game. Have too wait till I guess .   uninstalling
Boring Not what I expected. I found it very boring and tedious. Uninstalled it after a week.
Still sucks Thank you for a real non standardized message. Keep your chips. I play alot at real casinos and never seen 1 color come up  14 times in a row.  But I did raise the raiting to 2 stars since you repyed with a real message.
Issues Another update and another failure Fun game but irritating when for the past several weeks seeing updates but still seeing more server checking and server timeouts then game play
Never gives me any side off...but i love it ...
Entertaining, yet incredibly repetitive I often find myself skipping the dialog. It doesn't mean a thing.
Why it doesn't work in HK I can download but cannot use, cest pas vrai...... very disappointed
Fixes are required for enjoyment The game frequently closes, erasing all progress that has been made. The game also lags at several points during gameplay as well as cut scenes. This game is fun, but it is rare when Eric does not occur.
Problems not fixed. Nexus 4 Upgrade to Android 5 brings new problems, highlights that interface has never been properly finished. Sent in screen grab some time ago, no action so I'm downgrading.
What happened I updated it and my game wont start and all that is happening is that it goes on to the software screen and then it crashes. Please fix it this is my favorite game
Most weather station dot have good data poor app im a spotter
CAN'T FIND IT ANYWHERE Downloaded.  Installed.  Downloaded Amber feed app. Doesn't show up anywhere in any of my drawers.  Not a noob.  What's going on  Please advise.
Black screen Ill change my review once i get to play the game but judging from these other comments im not the only one who cant even get past the intro screen. Please fix. Note 4 running lolipop
Third class application , u can put any thing else finger, and count will be shown..so totaly fake
Sucks No one likes this lamee game dont download this lame peice of crapp this is a i have a word for the idoit who made this wanna be game this game sucks take it down or i will right something bad under every single game you make

it always says unfortunately brave trials has stopped.  how can i level up if it always bugs out
Total bs I wouldnt let me hear what i recorded ever. Dont download
Wahiyat bakwas kabhi mat download kar naa
Note 3 not working Normally it's a really addictive game. But it doesn't now work on my note 3. Please sort it out and I will change rating.
Doesn't work I created a skin and uploaded it and chose browse and said that's not a skin silly
Awful Unplayable Controls This might be a good game... But it's impossible to play due to imprecise touch controls. Trying to press the same button 10 times to make something happen is ridiculous. I wish I could get my money back. DON'T BUY THIS GAME
Waste of time data money. Like focus strike block
Does it work in canada Won't let me request a taxi.  It detects my location fine but won't let me request a taxi as the button to click is greyed out.
Money dissapeares Everytime i save and log back in i loose like 100 gold  cant really power up with no money. If fixed 5 stars
Not working on Sony Xperia Z Startup screen only
Game go AWAY You should really taken it off because peoplekids don't like that so you can take all the games that can not work and that people don't like it SOOOOOO YYYYYAAAAHHHH
Trash Why should people be conned into paying just to remove the ads when they shouldnt poxy well be there in the first place.remove ads from all games then you may just get 5stars
Not able to install I purchased the app but not able to install download. it says, not able to install due to error 923.  When trying for refund, mention that can not refund at this time, try later.
It my new gameD Cool game
Very bad application when my turn to kill other it not moved screen is totally hanged.It not work
Wont install Wont let me install the newest update, keeps saying package file was not signed correctly..
Ok I dont understand the level system how do u level up and in the street mode your life should fall short
Shuts game down when I win. Takes more coins than it should for keys and power ups. Doesn't let me use all power ups I buy. Game really sucks
Rip off Hey wtf sims free play has animals and babies and stuff and this cost 7 dollars and all u do is go to work and have a house i paid for this remember....
They say they fixed the black screen issue but they haven't. You can't even access the settings when it black screens
Sucks I liked the game but it kept forcing close on me so i uninstalled it
Mixed feelings Gameplay is good and enjoyable. Shadow casting from light sources is quite annoying. I understand the concept but it really ruins game altogether.
Fix it please It loads up the videos...but they won't play   yes, i'm on a strong WiFi connection too
absolute crap. first game I have ever paid for and the worst pay outs ever.
Review Better than was, but I still gave 1 star until you update iNoty
Won't load My 3 year old is so disappointed  that  the  game  wouldn't load
Videos non disponibles Pourquoi faire a disponible sur Google Play Canada si on ne peut pas visionner les vidos
Doesnt work on SG prime After purchase, I only get a check license prompt when i first tried to run. Very dissapointing.
Uganda is not included on the database so I cannot use it.
Hated it It is stupid
Take to long to win any coins. One minute  you are up with a lot of coins and the next they keep taking them away. Wins are few and between and don't pay out enough. Bonus spin take for ever to happen.
I need a refund
Horrible game Impossible to get new gear, putting is impossible. Needs a bigger perfect swing stopping point will be unistalling very disappointed
No play option Keeps asked me to purchase
My daughter played it once. I paid 7.99 as a treat for my daughter to unlock all the characters and she played one time and it won't open the app anymore.
Well Well game
It doesn't work in lollipop at all
Clown game Don't download this  First u will be tested and if you pass you have to register u can tell them u don't have it but then they will make u do a fake account 
bugs I see people in the reviews saying that they can add they birthday to they profile and i can't and plus shouldn't the 140 character limit be gone in the DMs How about adding your country flag next to your location it will look pretty cool. 
Hate too much Didnt working
Anybody else I have tried and tried I hate to leave a bad rating but the first thing I wanted were the webcams can't seem to get it to work no matter what I do. I will gladly change my rating if it works. For now uninstall
Great but... You won't get a 5 until you make it shield controller compatible. Please make it so, and I will do the same. Thank you
Just AD'S
Paid to download a game that doesn't work. Why is that only certain letters are able to be chosen when playing the game I want a refund. Not worth downloading if you can't actually play the game.
Unauthorised for my Android Device Typical EA takes money and does not work on  Galaxy Tab 2. EA  explain
Saying no internet connection Either WiFi or data 8 out of 10 times will not open, saying need internet connection Please fix.
Ads In the middle of the fckng game 
Download  it  but can't  find  it
7.4 has huge bugs No access to rooms, chats don't appear at all. Here's a novel idea, you should maybe test apps before publishing them
Hated it Game for below 5 years children...
Incompatible with s6 edge Would love to play this game but will not work on my phone
it won't let me play When I get on the game, it just shows me pictures. Please fix this and I will rate you 5 stars.
Bad Strzt immer wieder ab . Fix it  Oder gebt mir mein Geld zurck
I just hate it It's not working properly and it is the most worst game ever played....I had a very bad experience with this game...
VIP I see the creators still don't care this app is broke
Not connecting to opel corsa c 2005 model
Make it realistic Should be the same chance as a real slot machine to make winning actually mean something with perhaps earn coins over time to play or option to buy
Its just a time waste.. sometimes you loose 80,00,000 but not even can declare one time.. you will not get better cards..
No write to external SD card Love the app but like others have pointed out it still does not write to an external xd card.
Not very interactive I wish there was more to do within each routine but it is a very simple app and my two year old was bored quickly.
Kak app. Not recording my trips.  Previous version was a little better.  Do not install this version.  Many people having problems with it.   Samsung s4 mini not compatible.
Doesn't work Crashed on opening emailed no refund or reply
On WiFi Only I can only send n receive when on WiFi I have try everything and nothing it wasn't like this before tho.. two stars because of the good variaty of games
If you're 6 or under this games for you To anyone over the age of six I implore you to stay away from this steaming pile of dung game... Pure horror show... Gag...
Fucking game 3rd stage 5th level bloody I had played since for 5000 times it does not climbing felt to break my phone into two pieces instead if that I uninstalled this game bloddy fucking game Need more patience but its waste of time
Doesn't work charged twice I thought this would work better than free version,  but I was charged twice and it won't even start.  I've sent messages with no response.
not to mention the stupid ads, when com. reaches 96 or 97 then rolls the dice, gets 56 and wins
Force close problem  Ever since system update on Galaxy S6, it force closes immidiately after opening ap. Was a favorite for years now doesn't work.  Frowny face
False advertisement The video you have for this game on Facebook is nothing like the game. I wanted to play the game that was in the video
Modern sniper I don't like how you have to pay for energy before you move to level 5
Rose Ouellette The cards are to small can't see them...
Have paid over 6 for this an   cannot get it to install on my phone get message saying error code 923
All apps backed up REALLY It immediately tells me all apps are backed up but it doesn't.  The same amount of apps are still listed as not backed up. and these are free programs,  not copy protected
E uma droga So ten opsoes de treinmo e uma putas
Last update ruined it I loved this app, but now it locks my S3 up so hard I must pull the battery. This happens when a call comes in or I mess with Waze too much.  Made me sad to uninstall it.
Please fix the lag This would be an Amazing game if you could fix the lag 5 stars for less lag
Unknown error Ever since my phone updated to kit kat I can't install it.  Unknown error code 24 is what I get.  I can't install it.
Problem so uninstalling My OK Google feature stopped working.. And the problem is preventing mic to be open so it can't listen and hence it can't respond...
Ads Rated one star because too many ads.  It's  completely asinine.  Every time you do anything an add pops up. I understand the purpose of ads but this is too much .
Special actions vanish After collecting a special action, they will vanish at various times for human players. AI opponents never lose their actions which makes it nearly impossible to ever win.
No Do not get this game. Al the time there is an add and it does not do wat you want to.
Still Needs Work The AI seems to be stronger with the update but is still pretty weak nonetheless. Constantly crashes in campaign. Has potential but still needs lots of work before developers can justify cost of this game.
Very good Its very interesting
Blackjack Dealing is ridickulously throttled and controlled. Dealer hits 21 or blackjack 87, especially during crucial hands. Only the stupid may apply.
What I look at it and I'm like it's solitare. What can go wrong So I download it and opened it, and it makes a sound that ripes my ear in half. Then, when I try to actually play it, it ignores almost everything that I tell it to do. So yeah.
Used to be good Constantly crashes when I try to open the app, crashes after every round I play.
I wouldn't even give this game one star, every time I start a game on a table they kick me off and I have to use MY chips to buy back in again. Really sucks Fix it
Can not move I could not go anywhere stuck        HEY HELP ME
Useless Well, I didn't get much use out of it but my son maybe for few days.
Need to fix android lollipop issue. Does not work at all says need to connect to internet
Needs update I have bought everything and level 57 now and their is nothing to buy please add more thing's so the game can be even better cause its getting boring making money but not able to buy anything unstalling now
Support is crap If you have a paid license issue, don't count on any support
What a joke This app is a joke, there's ads every 5 seconds I counted and after every ad you're sent back to the home page of the app. Its entirely unusable, such a piece of trash.
Crashes sometimes Cant join groups. It stops working alot and force closes. Im unable to get on it says it cant connect to the server when i do manage to get on its laggy
nervt Man wird regelmig aufgefordert, die App zu bewerten. Abwhlen ist nicht mglich. Aufforderung kommt auch, wenn schon bewertet wurde.
So many ads Fun game if there wasn't an ad every 10 secs wow...
Nevership Invention untitled
Please fix why the hell does this app automatically turn my phone to silent after it has blocked a call Used to love this app but now im starting to hate it just because of this
What is this Keeps on saying no games found  1010 my sis wasted my money on singstar.fix it FAST
Disappointed Regardless how many time i change the sounds for the alarm it is stuck on the alarm clock. Very disappointed.
Good Download sarjug Ji kiye the to nahi chala tha
Zzzz Can't login , can't watch , please fix faster .
Not worth it Might as well get the free version, but neither one works on my phone. Won't let you make key combinations to be able to finish the game. Don't waste your money
Nonsence Don't download this
QD hnlich schrottig wie frher Studi VZ Die App wirkt im Vergleich mit anderen Quiz Apps vorsintflutlich. Schlimm ist es gegen so viele Betrger antreten zu mssen. So macht es keinen Spa. Nutze nur noch QuizUp.
Omg its so lovely and romantic
Data mining First thing it did was ask for marketing demographic information. Very poor and impossible to opt out or skip. Refuse to give free marking data. Uninstalled.
its the best app ever i cant sing but this app changes every thing i thing you will really enjoy this app
Wtf i cant figure out level six because none of the letters work
Bad Bad
 WHERE IS THE XHRISTMAS ONE I BOUGHT. I CANT FIND IT N TO DOWNLOAD IT
Ads Ads, ads ads ads wait five seconds, ten seconds, fifteen seconds, is not that good.
 U know why does shadow fight 2 work but not vector It just keeps crashing 
Refund my money I lost my coins which I purchased on 3rd July. My app got uninstalled by mistake. My coins are gone on re installing.. Plz Refund my money or give my the coins..
Do Not Download Very pushy about getting your info, huge rip off if you were into it enough to spend , and false advertising.
Good
Pops up in the notification thingy,  cant use my own picture to add text to.
The game always went into browser and said something about att
Update Note 3 now not working.  Tried pop out mode it gave a spinning circle and never loaded video.  Closed app restarted and now I just get a black screen. Had no issues before update.
Wont install on galaxy tab 4
Sad I love this app. It's true that the purchased app shouldn't have adds, but I can deal with that. What I don't love is the fact that it crashes so much I can't even play. Fix the crashes or refund my money.
Closes immediately after launch Used to work before lollipop update.  Now it closes and goes back to home screen immediately after launch.
One piece nya ilang min, munculin  one piece lagi dong admin yang baik hati, nanti saya rate bintang 5
Crab people This app describes my life entirely, because it was made by the crab people and I was also made by obamcare so yeh
The game is lame and too many ads.
Don't download this app I hate it because yuou have to buy the rest of the app wats the point of it being free if you have to buy the rest of the app
Mager Dafr dass es was kostet ist es doch ziemlich mager. Wenigstens durch die Cartoons scrollen und bewerten wr schn.
Doesn't work for HTC M8 Hopefully this will be fixed in the future
No major difference than regular version As the title says. I payed for the upgraded version and I'm not able to see anymore previews than in the regular version. It's not faster and it doesn't show all deleted data.
What the hell Nimbuzz isn't getting connected...my contacts aren't showing on display.. even I'm not showing online...idk when nimbuzz will work better again... Really getting frustrated with the app.
Word Breaker Bad Please. I cannot use the R or d.  the WRONG letters appear...help
I can't add friends I cannot send nor receive gifts because the game won't let me add anyone. When I click on the social tab, it says coming soon, but soon never seems to come Fix this for a better rating
Unable to trim imported videos Since getting the latest update, I am unable to trim imported videos as it does not allow me to set the start and stop time. It worked flawlessly on past versions. Please fix.
Hated it Doesn't even work. What type of game is this
Bakwaas App... no use..to keeping this it will only waste u r space m nothing else
Deserves zero stars Dont waste your time with this app, press back and download something else. There were way to many ads in my notifications. Uninstalled.
Too slow When you press a button, you have to wait and wait until it does what you want it to do. Also there is nothing to do
Online gaming limited. Local wins not counting towards achievements. It used to track progress but after the last update, it no longer does. I reduced my rating from 4 to 1. Fix this and I will give those stars back.
Update...  I can't seem to be able to play with my friends on multiplayer. Also please add in horses, The End, the Nether, and cats. Then I will rate 5 stars D
Needs Connection My phone cant find my Friend's mobile even It's Just at my Side Its So slow when I am not in Internet or Wifi Connection BUT its also Good app.
Not working with my 41ln5720 bought in the middle east I want to change the country to India...but the app can't find my Tv...even  with putting IP address directly I cant connect.
Game is great, but there is one thing that sucks you need to have Internet to play it
Cash grab Notable sources of frustration are the weak weapons and the fact that this is a fps on android. Shame for the development team wasted on this, they could do better. Also do the ads ever stop, even after paying
I really hate this and the person who creat this is idiot one.
Crashing Was a good thing to pass the time nothing special but now keeps crashing proper wreck the head
Very very bad Because mostly sunny shows a cloudy picture... Its realy bad
Terrible You can't do any moves while sprinting the tackling mechanics make no sense first downs are 10 yards not fing 50 I would have given it a 0 if I could have
Fuck you bitch I have 87 score over 90 fuck you all hahahahaa
Stopped Working Worked great for my 3 year old on my s4. Does not run on my s6. It won't even open...                                                    EDIT 71815 STILL BROKEN ON MY SAMSUNG GALAXY S6... FIX IT OR REFUND ME MY MONEY
Won't install Spent money to watch it not install on my LG G smartwatch.
i hated it because all u do is look for words and thats not fun people would want games that are fun
Rigged Can't help but feel that the comp has an unfair advantage in every move.
Bug Game pause by itself ... the touch does not work as expected.. slow to react.sorry.may be its my phone ,a wiko Will give 5 if not issues
Keeps saying off line no internet, but I checked our other apps and the internet connection great.....worked well before update
Basic Shapes Change the star and heart to a square and rectangle. We need the basic shapes.
Seriously This game was my favorite until the update I just downloaded all day it's said I need to check my network connectivity an dots annoying the heck out of me This was a 5  game until now. I'm extremely disappointed
Last update made it worse Marbles don't follow the course. They flow in their own direction off course and its confusing because you do not know where it ends or begins. Please fix this
I didnt get my jelly gt I paid for the 4.99 jelly package and never received it. I also never got a response when I emailed them about it.
stupid Didn't like the reshuffle the remaining tiles if you didn't  win so eventually you'll  win, feature. Like playing with a small child so nobody loses
Can't save your work How do you save anything you do
Old version had more functionality
Does not work with lollipop. Error message. Fix this already
Dosnt let me online Why u dont need to get this if you are inpasont
Bug not letting me sign in I have been trying to login from all the options but it says the server is not connecting , a bit of a hiccup. Almost there What is it. Pls fix the app
The screen goes blank please fix for all my play home apps the screen goes blank.
Ah voting it first time and I don't think that this game is bad
Kjpe versjonen er veldig ustabil
Does not work with shield controller Bought this to play on my shield tablet based on it saying it supported controllers, but it hangs on the home screen when controller is enabled. Refund please.
 I was so sad to find out there are no free songs. All songs are 1.49
Doesn't work on Android phones. Too late to figure it out so you can't get a refund. Don't buy if you have android phone through play store. Doesn't work. To late to get a refund by the time you input all info.
 Apparently if your in a multiplayer lobby full of Noobs and they report you, then your account will be banned forever with no evidence to prove any cheating was used. thanks  gameloft
6 filters for 1.99 These add on packs are quite the ripoff...
Used to open HERE navigation before update Now after update this will only open up Google navigation. I use HERE  MAPS  exclusively because of its off line navigation abilities please change it back to being able to open HERE MAPS.
Its meh.. This version feels very bland and the game even on 2million is just way too short even with 4 players..  Still it was worth playing a few times but original monopoly is far better.
This is a fun game, we can meet a lots of friends but spent a lots of money. If you don't buy rubies you won't get everything. The more time the more greedy is this game
Unknown hi i am indian, this game like chess but little diffrent, so i dont know how to play this
Game doesn't even start This game is so rubbish that you should never play it ever again
Not authorised on my phone Using Sony z1, would appreciate it if it's fixed..
Wtf All my saved calls are suddenly gone I had calls back as far as January 2015, and now there's nothing except a random week in April and calls from this previous week What happened
Uninstalling this game Advertisement on brake pedal
Fraut app. This is totally fraud app..it only consumes ur mobile data...I am suggesting u not download this app...
Great game but very buggy Great game but all online bugs from MW1 are here in MW2. Developer said they were fixed in MW2 and would be back ported to MW1.  I guess not. In app purchases up to 100. How can a company defend such a charge
Good game but I would of given 5 stars but game shuts down on its own FIX PLS
Should be free...feeling disappointed Should be free...feeling disappointed
No push notifications After July 13th update, I no longer receive push notifications from my followed users... it's annoying and I know you'll recommend to uninstall and install again. Please fix it
Rubbish design
Could be better Just spent a long time re writing my profile and just lost everything having been signed out.  App causes more aggro and anger every time I use it.
FLOOD AFTER PAYMENT Please, start the next level on the app restart Please, maker startup faster. ATM we have got an age on startup. This is a reason I play this game very rare. Rate and Invite friends flood exists even after payment
Too many ads.... Too slow.... Awful. Boring...
I played it for a long time and it got boring add more levels and make the guns cheaper what else can we do than just shoot and win and FYI this is a girl typing do all this then i will give you five stars
Very frustrating The game is so frustrating it take you a while to pass to the next level which can almost makes you want to throw you're phone at a wall I wish it was a little more easier just so people can actually enjoy it
Gps worked right for like a week, now doesn't track right and takes forever to find my location. Just got a new phone also so i was expecting better.
Bad Nots good
Not so good Needs a lot of improvement you can not edit  comments, notification buttons issue , though its fast but has a poor material design
Hate it There only 5 opitions and i finished the game in 45s I HATE YOU WASTING OUR TIME DO NOT DOWNLOAD THIS APP WASTES OUR TIME
Is this an under maintenance we return in 2 hours since this morning I saw this I wanted to work I want to play Fix it please i love playing
Sooooo sloowww Since update has slowed down drastically. Wasn't bad with Galaxy, but the courage award for self mutilation  uninstall
Doesn't work I have an HTC one m8 and whenever I roll the dice and land on a property it automatically shuts down. Fix this game
Poor app No rules and no end in carrom...thats really rubbish
Well hmm I was enjoying this game until i went to unlock stuff, I'm not paying that much money to unlock it... nope, uninstalled
Adds First time in my life buy pro version apps with adds. Suck
Forced closed This app forced closed after downloading and trying to read the books.
Nope I hate this game, especially the developers who constantly ignored my emails about a refund that I really wanted due to glitches. I would not recommend this game to anyone.
Its fine The game prackeckly gives u the answers
Too much delay Way too much delay and echos. Not impressed.
Stopped working well since 1.5  Paid for this one but now it's all messed up PLEASE FIX ASAP. I'm on LG G3
This game is so boring Because it don't let me do anything every 3 min is ad
Completely unusable I am forced to download this on mobile if I want to visit the site, but when I do I am unable to view the question I am interested in. Very sloppy. I will no longer be using this app or the website at all
Won't open on my Asus MeMO pad 8 This game deserves between 4 and 5 stars but I can't open it without it crashing Please fix and I will change my rating.
Never win any big hits
Please fix screen blackout on nexus 9
Demon game Every time I start to win one certain game, it crashes. Don't know the game number...
Inaccurate to a degree of ridiculousness total waste of time  money Crap
bakwaas game... very bad gapes are 2 wide plz make the gaps shorter
Sucks. All of my chat requests have been from bots. All of the people I meet are bots. Like really and you want me to pay for plus
Kinda regret buying it There is so many things locked that you have to buy with real money to use .. its like free to play game model
Loading... It doesn't load. I want a refund.
ceasers slots it did an update and i lost 60 million dollars and now i have about 200 thousand i loved this game please fix and return my millions so i can enjoy the game again
No help I can not seen help option, or even any option. Was installed faulty
Portrait mode only Entertaining, but having to hold in portrait mode to play, when my Nexus 10 stand is landscape, gets old fast. Would rate higher if it had landscape mode.
It's a fun app. But I get stuck on question 95 and nothing I do will get me past it. I tried looking up the answer and still didn't get me past it, I'm uninstalling and reinstalling and it didn't help. Still stuck on 95... bad app.
Group chat on android I stil cant enter gr0up chat.sucks
Jacob Brown
Can't add individuals, only communities. A bug in the app right now prevents adding people, only can add communities. Using a browser to add, then going back to the app does not register that I have added anyone except communities.
Not mancala That's not how u play mancala and there is no CAPTURE 
This suck I want my money back first off i download it on my tmobile exhibit 2 then it says something about a 300mb download tryed that it dont work how the hell it say free space when i have 14gb of free space this is a rip off. 0 stars.
Game not working Yet again another ea game downloaded and it says this device is not authorised when it checks for license.  Ea you need to sort this out everytime you bring a game out it always has license problems
Hate it. Can not edit my profile recommendation are not acoording to my partner preferrence
Meh You only get a few puzzles before being asked to pay
NEED MY MONEY BACK This game won't even let me enter  my name Wasted of my money Refund please
Ugh Do better there are to many adds
Doesn't work on a restricted profile I have a 'safe' profile set up using the built in android functionality, but this game will not load up on it. Unfortunately that means its a 0 star, nonestarter for me
Doest work properly sucks It sometimes doest work... Even when u have locked the apps... U can still open it without a pin or password.... I don't suggest it to my friend
Hate it so boring  need to add more things to the game and I will  rate 5 stars
Uninstall After pressing start i can hear the music but the steps won't load all I can see is white screen and pink ring that never stops turning. I have 3Mbps connection.
Waste of timebad service I waited 30 minutes for the taxi to  come to my place... the driver called in and asked for address despite of explaining clearly he dint return the call and cancelled the booking. their autos are better. Comparativly
Useless I've tried this on 4 phones and 1 tablet over a year or two.  The app is completely brokenthe pointer randomly jumps at times greater than 90 degrees.  Tried all the settings designed to fix issues with no help.
My son was using this every day but all of a sudden it stopped working and sayss I don't have the correct hardware with a black screen
Thanks 5 Thanks
Awful Words are way too hard on the easy level. Most words I have never even heard of before
Too slow gameplay It's still too slow in matches. The speed should match the one from previous version. Football manager 2014 is by far the best. Should reconsider when creating 2016.
Keeps crashing This app is great when it works but  when it constantly crashes it gets very frustrating and will use less. Please fix ASAP
Still buggy App works well but restarts to frequently in the background. With the screen off it siphoned 40 of my battery. Please fix
Faulty app Sony Z2, you can't build properties as the app stops allowing you to scroll around the board after a few rolls. Do not buy.
Not good
Ajay paswan So so so bad
Need something new ....
NOT ABLE TO SAVE IN FREE VERSION It doesn't allow you to save it without the full game its totally ridiculous fix and it gets 5 stars
Ok. Not as fast as Amazon or Snap Deal It always says try later. Whenever you search something it will show few pics and then server busy try later.
Not very hard If you tell me most of the answers there is no point in playing. At least give me multiple choice
Baby musical instrument Nice
Just to let you know... ...this app has been laggy. It wasn't before and the precedent app is perfectly fine. Please fix this bug.
Broken Update won't let me connect. Did you guys even test it before making this update live Jesus Christ....
SGN3 I don't like my contacts being shared and there's no way to turn it off completely.  Because of this, I am uninstalling this app.
Horrible Download the game, and unable to open to even attempt to play
Cannot even exit Bad does not even begin to describe this app
Worst trial ever ITS SO GLICHY AND YOU CANT EVEN PRESS ON ANYTHING PLEASE FIX.AND YOU DIDNT MENTION ANYTHING ABOUT A TRIAL IN THE DESCRIPTION.HOPE YOU GUYS FIX IT BECAUSE I HAVE BEEN WAITING A LONG TIME FOR A GOOD TRIAL FOR TERRARIA TRY AGAIN PEOPLE.
Its good but not very good
Good game, but... I've tried to conquer the conquested territory three times I beat the round required but I didn't get it I'm so angry.
Pathetic
Hangs on open N10
Wheel of fun Would be fun if it worked.the key pad don't work you have to push it many times. An the ads at the bottom of the screen will not stop so half the wheel is covered. Sorry I had so much trouble.