First case of corona virus was noticed as cold in 1960. Ac-cording to the Canadian study 2001, approximately 500 patients were identified as Flu-like system. 17-18 cases of them were confirmed as infected with corona virus strain by polymerase chain reaction. Corona was treated as simple non fatal virus till 2002. In 2003, various reports published with the proofs of spreading the corona to many countries such as United States America, Hong Kong, Singapore, Thailand, Vietnam and in Taiwan. Several case of severe acute respiratory syndrome caused by corona and their mortally more than 1000 patient was reported in 2003. This was the black year for microbiologist. When microbiologist was started focus to understand these problems. After a deep exercise they conclude and understand the patho-genesis of disease and discovered as corona virus. But till total 8096 patient was confirmed as infected with corona virus. So in 2004, World health organization and centers for disease control and prevention declared as “state emergency”. Another study report of Hong Kong was confirmed 50 patient of severe acute respiratory syndrome while 30 of them were confirmed as corona virus infected. In 2012, Saudi Arabian reports were presented several infected patient and deaths.[1–4] COVID-19 was first identified and isolated from pneumonia patent belongs to Wuhan, china.
Corona virus is spherical or pleomorphic, single stranded, enveloped RNA and covered with club shaped glycopro-tein. Corona viruses are four sub types such as alpha, beta, gamma and delta corona virus. Each of sub type corona viruses has many serotypes. Some of them were affect human of other affected animals such as pigs, birds, cats, mice and dogs.
Peoples can get the infection through close contact with a person who has symptoms from the virus includes cough and sneezing. Generally corona virus was spread via airborne zoonotic droplets. Virus was replicated in ciliated epithelium that caused cellular damage and infection at infection site. According to a study published in 2019, Angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE.2), a membrane exo-peptidase in the receptor used by corona virus in entry to human cells.
According to a report published on 24 Jan 2020, corona virus infected patient have many common features such as fever, cough, and fatigue while diarrhea and dyspnea were found to be as uncommon feature. Many of them patient reported bilateral abnormalities. Corona virus was isolated from bronchoalvelor lavage fluid in china in 2020. It is also detected in blood samples. Till now, corona virus was not confirmed in feaces and urine sample of patent.
There is nothing to provide complete guidance to prevent from corona virus but some guidelines was presented by WHO and ECDC. Basically these guidelines are for health profession to set during the caring of infected patient. Because many evidence was presented by studies about human to human transmission of corona from Wuhan, china. Another study reported about airborne transmission of virus while no one was presents the solid evidence. As the lack of transmission evidence health professionals were not able to present prevention guidelines. According to WHO, some general guidelines were published such as separate the infected patient from other family member to single room, implementation of contact and droplet precaution, airborne precaution etc. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) also published the information leaflet to peoples i.e. Avoid contact with sick people, in particular those with a cough. Avoid visiting markets and places where live or dead animals are handled, Wash your hands with soap and water or use an alcohol based disin-fectant solution before eating, after using the toilet and af-ter any contact with animals, Avoid contact with animals, their excretions or droppings.
There is no special vaccine for this yet. Only supportive therapy is the treatment strategy followed by health professionals. Supportive therapy includes administration of antipyretic and analgesic, maintenance of hydration, mechanical ventilation as respiratory support and uses of antibiotic in bacterial infections. Some research studies claimed that ribavirin and interferon alpha have offered synergetic effect in early stage. While other studies reported mycophenolic acid as monotherapy. Still health professionals were not fully satisfied with any therapy so further clinical research needed.
Corona virus was spreading human to human to transmission by close contact via airborne droplets generating by coughing, sneezing, kissing and smooching. So avoid these activities with infected partners and family members. Corona virus may transmit through pet animals such as dog, cat, pig, cow, turkeys. So avoid contact and seprate them if observed any infection activities like diarrhea, cold, fever. As per WHO and ECDC guideline avoid the contact with sick person and also avoid the market or public place as per possible. There are no anti corona virus vaccine to prevent or treatment but some supporting therapy work. Future research needed to fight with corona virus. Till only ‘Distance is rescue’.
